--- START BusinessStudies-SQP 2025-26.pdf ---
Please note that the assessment scheme of the academic session 2024-25 will continue in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
  BUSINESS STUDIES (054) 
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER 
CLASS XII (2025-26) 
  MM – 80                                                                                            TIME: 3 Hours 
 
 
General instructions   : 
1 This question paper contains 34 questions. 
2. Marks are indicated against each question. 
3. Answers should be brief and to the point. 
4. Answers to the questions carrying 3 marks may be from 50 to 75 
words. 
5. Answers to the questions carrying 4 marks may be about 150 words. 
6. Answers to the questions carrying 6 marks may be about 200 words. 
7. Attempt all parts of the questions together. 
 
Q.N 
 
Marks 
1 . The project managers in an organisation set targets for the upcoming 
months and outline strategies to achieve them. At the same time, they 
assign specific roles and responsibilities to their team members. They 
motivate them to meet the deadline, by celebrating their achievements 
and taking their feedback. Thus, various functions are simultaneously 
performed by all managers all the time. Name the characteristic of 
Management discussed above. 
 a) Management is a dynamic function 
 b) Management is a continuous process 
 c) Management is an intangible force  
d) Management is goal oriented 
1  
Please note that the assessment scheme of the academic session 2024-25 will continue in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
2.   Henri Fayol's principle of discipline which emphasizes obedience to 
organisational rules and employment agreement, is evolved out of the 
experience and collective wisdom of managers. The nature of principle 
of management reflected through the above statement is—------------- 
 a) Universal applicability 
 b) Flexible 
 c) Mainly behavioral 
 d) Formed by practice and experimentation 
 1  
3. Read the following statements: Assertion (A) and Reason (R). 
Choose the correct alternative from those given below:  
ASSERTION(A): Maslow’s need hierarchy theory of motivation is 
widely recognised and appreciated yet criticised. 
REASON(R): Even though Maslow's theory focuses on needs as a 
basis of motivation and helps to develop understanding about the 
motivation phenomenon, his propositions are questioned on their 
classification and hierarchy.  
Alternatives : 
(a)   Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true. 
(b)   Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are false. 
(c)  Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true, but Reason (R) is not the 
correct explanation of the Assertion. 
(d)  Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true, and Reason (R) is the 
correct explanation of the Assertion. 
 1 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the academic session 2024-25 will continue in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
4. Read the following statements carefully: 
Statement- I Values are basic truths or guidelines for behaviour which 
are formed after research in work situations. 
Statement- lI While practising Principles of Management, values 
cannot be neglected as business organisations have to fulfil social and 
ethical responsibility towards society. 
In the light of given statements , choose the correct alternative 
from the following: 
(a)Both the statements are true. 
(b)   Both the statements are false. 
(c)   Statement I is true, Statement II is false. 
(d) Statement II is true,  Statement I is false 
 1 
 5. Manu Priya is working as the Human Resource Manager of EDT Limited 
at an annual salary of ₹  8 lakh per annum and is also offered shares of 
the company at a set price which is lower than the market price. The 
method being used to calculate the compensation provided to her is—
------.  
 a) Time based direct financial payment 
 b) Indirect financial payment 
 c) Time based Pay Plus incentives 
 d) Performance based direct financial payment  
 1 
 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the academic session 2024-25 will continue in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
6. Out of the following, which is/are the component(s) of the social 
environment. 
1) Rate of inflation has increased by 2% leading to a higher total cost 
for business enterprises. 
 2)Various specialty health food and grocery shops have opened in an 
area where fitness and health enthusiasts live. 
 3) Life expectancy rate in India has improved over the past 20 years 
due to adequate health facilities and infrastructure. 
 4) A company in its human resource manual discloses a zero 
tolerance policy for racial discrimination and discriminatory practices 
against employees with disability.  
5) The Advertising Standards Council of India prohibits the 
advertisement that promotes products or services that are banned by 
law. 
Choose the correct option : 
a) only 2 
 b) 1,2,3  
 c) 2,4,5 
d) 2,3,4 
 1 
7.  Name the element of marketing mix which includes deciding about 
the features, quality, packaging, labelling and branding of goods or 
services or ‘anything of value’ which is offered to the market for sale. 
 a) promotion 
 b) place  
c) product 
 d) price 
 1 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the academic session 2024-25 will continue in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
8 . Choose the correct statement about the controlling function of 
management. 
 a) No corrective action is required when the deviation goes beyond the 
acceptable range in important areas. 
 b) Deviations should be analysed for their causes. 
 c)Measurement of actual performance should be done only after the 
task is complete. 
 d)Managers must keep a check on each and every activity, otherwise 
the entire organisation may suffer. 
 1 
9. Look at the picture given below and answer the question that follows: 
 
 Identify the incorrect statement about the type of source of 
recruitment depicted above. 
 a) Management can attract qualified people to apply for vacant 
positions in the organisation. 
 b) It may lead to dissatisfaction and frustration among existing 
employees. 
 c) Such employees are not likely to be good employees as their 
background is not sufficiently known. 
 d) Management has a wider choice while selecting people for 
employment. 
 1 

Please note that the assessment scheme of the academic session 2024-25 will continue in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
10. Arrange the following elements of communication process in the 
correct sequence:  
i) Media 
ii) Message 
iii)Sender 
iv) Decoding 
v) Receiver 
vi) Feedback 
vii) Encoding 
Choose the correct option: 
a) iii,i,vii,ii,v,iv,vi 
b) iii,ii,vii,i,iv,v,vi 
c) ii,iii,vii,vi,iv,v,i 
d) ii,i,vii,iii,v,iv,vi 
 
11. Choose the correct statement about the meaning of depository. 
 a) Depository holds and transfers securities in the Demat Form. 
 b) Depository serves as an intermediary and buys and sells securities 
on the instructions of clients. 
 c) Depository is like a bank and keeps securities in electronic form on 
behalf of investors. 
 d) Depository buys securities from a company and sells to the public 
at a higher price.  
 1 
12. A product will be purchased only if it is perceived to be giving the 
greatest benefit for the money. 
Name the feature of marketing reflected in this statement 
 a) Creating a market offering 
 b) Customer value 
 c) Exchange mechanism 
 d) Needs and wants  
 1 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the academic session 2024-25 will continue in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
13. Match the concepts of management given in column I with their 
meaning given in column II 
 
 
COLUMN I 
 
COLUMN II 
A Management 
Hierarchy 
i Involves defining and grouping of activities, 
resource allocation and establishment of 
authority relationships. 
B Coordination ii  Involves establishing performance 
standards measuring actual performance 
and taking corrective action 
C Organising iii  It shows orderly arrangement of individual 
and group efforts to ensure unity of action in 
realisation of common objectives. 
D Controlling iv  Refers to different levels in the organisation 
created as a result of authority 
responsibility relationships binding 
individuals as superiors and subordinates.  
Choose the correct option from the following: 
a)Aiv,B iii, Cii, Di 
b)ii, B iii, Civ, Dii 
c)Aiv, B iii,Ci ,Dii 
d)Aiii, Biv, Ci, Dii 
1 
14. Mr Gun Amroha, the General Manager of Welworth Textiles scans the 
business environment and adapts the organisation to the changes 
taking place in different dimensions of the business environment. 
However, it is still difficult for him to accurately assess the future 
trends. Identify the limitation of planning related to the above. 
 a) Planning leads to rigidity. 
b) Planning may not work in a dynamic environment.  
 1 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the academic session 2024-25 will continue in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
c) Planning does not guarantee success. 
 d) Planning reduces creativity.  
15. Name the step in the staffing process which enables the organizations 
to offer opportunities for career advancement to their employees by 
facilitating learning, thereby helping the organisations to not only 
attract but also retain its talented people in the organisation. 
a. Placement and Orientation 
b. Recruitment 
c. Training and Development 
d. Performance Appraisal 
 1 
16. ‘Game of Clones’ , a reputed amusement company has decided to run 
an advertising campaign for which it is hiring various celebrities. The 
campaign involves an expenditure of ₹ 150 Crores. Identify the 
financial decision involved in the above case. 
a. Long term investment decision 
b. Financing decision 
c. Working capital decision 
d. Dividend decision 
 1 
17. Arth Nivesh Limited has a high fixed operating cost. The Finance 
Manager informs the Chief Finance Officer that, in case the company 
decides to take a loan, for its future financial needs, its fixed financial 
cost will also increase leading to an overall increase in cost. Identify 
the factor affecting choice of capital structure discussed above. 
 a) Cost of debt 
1 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the academic session 2024-25 will continue in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
 b) Floatation cost 
 c) Risk consideration 
 d) Control 
18. The Finance Manager of Elle Pharma Limited, Mr Ashish Manjrekar 
wants to raise funds through debt or equity to the extent of ₹2 crores. 
For this purpose, he approaches a well regulated financial market that 
facilitates the mobilisation of long term capital for companies. Identify 
the market where Mr Ashish Manjrekar can raise the funds. 
 a) Money market  
b) Secondary market 
 c) Capital market 
 d) Wholesale debt market  
1 
19. ‘Companies are required to ensure that the dividend does not violate 
the terms of loan agreement. ’ Identify the relevant factor affecting 
dividend decisions being discussed above. 
 a) Access to capital market 
 b) Legal constraints 
 c) Stock market reaction 
 d) Contractual constraints 
1 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the academic session 2024-25 will continue in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
20. Read the following statements carefully: 
Statement I- The objective of financial management is to maximize the 
wealth of directors of the company 
Statement II- The financing decision of the company is unaffected by 
the extent of retained earnings. 
In the light of given statements , choose the correct alternative 
from the following: 
(a)Both the statements are true. 
(b)   Both the statements are false. 
(c)   Statement I is true, Statement II is false. 
(d) Statement II is true, Statement I is false. 
1 
21.  A) State any three points of significance of decentralization. 
                                        OR 
B) State any three limitations of formal organisation. 
 3 
22. Anabel Creations, an apparel designing company has a huge pile of 
young men’s and women’s garments to be sold across its branches in 
various cities. In order to clear the stock, the company has decided to 
give a heavy discount on its garments, with a view to lure the buyers. It 
is also visiting various colleges for sponsoring fashion shows in order 
to push its sales. However ,the garments are not liked by the 
customers as they have not been made as per their needs and 
preferences. 
a) Identify and state the Marketing Management philosophy being 
followed by Anabel Creations. 
b) Name and state any two other philosophies of Marketing apart from 
the one identified in part a. 
 3 
23. A) Give any three points of distinction between the money market and 
capital market. 
                                     OR 
 B) Give any three protective functions performed by Securities and 
Exchange Board of India. 
3 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the academic session 2024-25 will continue in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
24. Muralidhar Parekh started textile printing business in Gujarat in the 
year 2022 by using practices like eco-friendly dyeing and printing 
processes in order to ensure environmental sustainability. Soon the 
business started flourishing. For the financial year 2024-25, Muralidhar 
formulated the organisational goal of increasing sales by 10% and 
framed strategies for their achievement. Since his job was complex 
and stressful, he appointed subordinates to carry out the main task of 
implementing and controlling the plans and strategies made by him. 
 Identify the level at which the necessary workforce was appointed for 
implementing and controlling the plans and strategies made by 
Muralidhar Parekh. What will they need to do to carry out this main 
task? State any two points.  
 
 3 
  
 
25. A) Explain the following functions of Marketing: 
a. Customer support services 
b. Packaging and labelling 
                  OR 
B) Explain two features of the following: 
a. Personal selling 
b. Advertising 
 4 
26. A) Explain why planning is considered as  
a) pervasive  
b) futuristic function of management.  
                        OR 
B) Explain the following as a type of plans : 
a) strategy  
b) procedure 
 4 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the academic session 2024-25 will continue in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
27. The Marketing Research Manager of ‘Trendy Textiles’ has been assigned 
the task of analysing the influence of Generation Z on fashion trends. 
On studying the forces that affect business, he observed that 
increased awareness amongst Generation Z, with respect to, 
environmental protection, preference of individuality over trends, 
rejection of traditional norms in clothing, greater use of social media 
have increased the demand for sustainable and innovative styles in 
clothing, ‘Do It Yourself’ (DIY) products, promotion of products on 
various social media platforms by companies. 
a) In context of the above case, identify and explain the feature of the 
business environment highlighted above. 
b) Explain any two features of the business environment, apart from 
the one identified in part a). 
 4 
28. ‘A good control system helps the organisation in various ways’ . State 
any four points to support the statement. 
 4 
29. The Factory Manager of Manik Steel Plant, Mussadi Lal was in dilemma 
over workers shirking work. It was becoming difficult for him to identify 
the workers who sometimes faked illness to skip work and on various 
other times, intentionally wasted time, which led to underutilisation of 
resources. The job of the workers was complex and intricate. He 
discussed the problem with one of his retired friends, Kantilal, who 
suggested him to appoint eight supervisors who would be specialists 
in their own fields and would be assigned work according to his/her 
qualities. Identify and explain the technique of scientific management 
discussed above.  
  
  
  
4 
30. PP Motors is a reputed automobile company known for manufacturing 
high performance four wheelers. The company plans to hire eight new 
engineers. Akhilesh Banerjee, the Human Resource Manager has 
eliminated unfit job seekers based on the information supplied in the 
 4 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the academic session 2024-25 will continue in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
application forms, conducted various tests and interviews and verified 
the information of the applicants. 
Identify and explain the remaining steps that Mr Banerjee must 
undertake in order to ensure that the organisation gets the best among 
the available, from the pool of prospective job candidates. 
31. Satya Prakash has been successfully running a dry fruit  wholesale 
business in Rajasthan for the past five years.   He makes sufficient 
investments in current assets in order to facilitate smooth day-to-day 
operations of the business. The company has recently sold dry fruits 
worth ₹ 50 lakhs to one of its corporate customers, ‘Deshmukh Pure 
Grains’ on a strict credit policy. Satya Prakash then immediately placed 
an additional order for replenishment of stock. However, he received 
the dry fruits from his supplier after a large time lag.  
 a) State the concept of Financial Management discussed above. 
 b) Briefly explain the factors highlighted above that will affect the 
requirement of the concept identified in part a). 
 6 
32. Mr Pankaj Kumar is working as the Human Resource Manager in 
Alankaar Fabrics Limited heading a team of fifteen people in his 
department. He has played a key role in the success of his organisation 
by maintaining good interpersonal relations with his subordinates and 
influencing their behaviour. The subordinates willingly cooperate with 
him and his working style to increase the output of the organisation. 
a) Identify and explain the element involved in one of the functions of 
management discussed in the above case. 
b)State any four features of the element identified in part a). 
  
6 
Please note that the assessment scheme of the academic session 2024-25 will continue in the current session i.e. 2025-26 
33. Malini and Shalini recently completed their web designing course from 
a reputed University in Mumbai. Malini opened her own website 
development company ’ Rapid Software Private Limited’ .In order to 
ensure a smooth flow of communication and better control over the 
operations of her business, she divided the entire work of a company 
into four departments i.e web designing, accounting, research and 
development and customer service. All departments are required to 
report to a coordinating head. The company became successful in the 
market as all operations were carried out with a high degree of 
specialisation. 
                Shalini joined a big group named Babylon.com,Inc. which 
offered a variety of services like Babylon Web Services, Babylon Prime, 
Babylon Retail. She was appointed as the head of Babylon Web 
Services division and was made responsible for the profit or loss of her 
service division.She was happy to take the responsibility as the 
division would function as an autonomous unit, thus enabling her to 
make faster decisions. 
 (a). Identify the types of the framework within which managerial and 
operating tasks are performed, in the organisations, of which, Malini 
and Shalini were a part of. 
(b). Give any four differences between the frameworks identified 
above. 
  
 6 
34. A) State any six reliefs available to a consumer under Consumer 
Protection Act, 2019. 
                                OR 
B) State the rights available under Consumer Protection Act, 2019 for 
the protection and promotion of interest of consumers. 
 6 
 
  
        

--- END BusinessStudies-SQP 2025-26.pdf ---
--- START BusinessStudies-MS 2025-26.pdf ---
 
BUSINESS STUDIES (054) 
CLASS XII (2025-26) 
MARKING SCHEME  
Marks 
1 b) Management is a continuous process 1 
2 d)  Formed by practice and experimentation 1 
3  d) Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true, and Reason (R) is 
the correct explanation of the Assertion. 
1 
4 
d) Statement II is true, Statement I is false 
1 
5 c) Time based pay plus incentives 1 
6 d)   2,3,4 1 
7 c) product  1 
8 b) Deviations should be analysed to find out the causes. 1 
9 c) Such employees are not likely to be good employees as their 
background is not sufficiently known. 
 
1 
10 b)  iii,ii,vii,i,iv,v,vi 1 
11 c) Depository is  like a bank and keeps securities in electronic form 
on behalf of investors. 
1 
12 b) Customer value 1 
13 c) Aiv, B iii,Ci ,Dii 1 
14 b) Planning does not work in a dynamic environment.  1 
15  c) Training and development 1 
16 a) Long term investment decision 1 
17 c)  Risk consideration 1 
18 c) Capital Market 1 
19 
d) Contractual constraints 
1 
20 b)  Both the statements are false. 1 
21 A) (i) Develops initiative among subordinates: Decentralisation 
Helps to promote self-reliance and confidence amongst the 
subordinates. This is because when lower managerial levels are 
given freedom to make their own decisions they learn to depend 
on their own judgement. 
(ii) Develops managerial talent for the future: Decentralisation 
gives them a chance to prove their abilities and creates a 
reservoir of qualified manpower who can be considered to fill up 
more challenging positions through promotions.  
(iii) Quick decision making: In a decentralised 
organisation,since decisions are taken at levels which are 
nearest to the points of action and there is no requirement for 
approval from many levels, the process is much faster. There 
are also less chances of  information getting distorted because 
it doesn’t have to go through long channels. 
(iv) Relief to top management:Decentralisation diminishes the 
amount of direct supervision exercised by a superior over the 
activities of a subordinate because they are given the freedom 
to act and decide albeit within the limits set by the 
superior.Decentralisation also leaves the top management with 
more time which they can devote to important policy decisions 
rather than occupying their time with both policy as well as 
operational decisions 
(v) Facilitates growth: Decentralisation awards greater 
autonomy to the lower levels of management as well as 
divisional or departmental heads. With each department doing 
its best in a bid to outdo the other, the productivity levels 
increase and the organisation is able to generate more returns 
which can be used for expansion purposes. 
(vi) Better control: Decentralisation makes it possible to 
evaluate performance at each level and the departments can be 
individually accountable for their results. 
                                              OR 
B) (a) The formal communication may lead to procedural delays 
as the established chain of command has to be followed which 
increases the time taken for decision making. 
(b) Poor organisational practices may not provide adequate 
recognition to creative talent, since it does not allow any 
deviations from rigidly laid down policies. 
(c) It is difficult to understand all human relationships in an 
enterprise as it places more emphasis on structure and work. 
Hence, the formal organisation does not provide a complete 
picture of how an organisation works.   
1X3=3 
any 3  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1×3=3 
22  a) The Marketing Management philosophy followed by Anabel 
Creation is the Selling concept.. 
This business philosophy assumes that the customers would not 
buy, or not buy enough, unless they are adequately convinced 
and motivated to do so.Therefore, firms must undertake 
aggressive selling and promotional efforts to make customers 
buy their products. The use of promotional techniques such as 
advertising, personal selling and sales promotion are considered 
essential for selling of products.  
b)The Production Concept- The focus of business activities is on 
production of goods. It is believed that profits can be maximised 
by producing at large scale, thereby reducing the average cost of 
production.Consumers would favour those products which are 
widely available at an affordable price. Thus, availability and 
affordability of the products are considered to be the key to the 
success of a firm. 
The Product Concept- products. The focus of business activity is 
on bringing continuous improvement in the quality, incorporating 
new features etc. Thus, product improvement became the key to 
profit maximisation of a firm, under the concept of product 
orientation. 
The Marketing Concept- It assumes that in the long run an 
organisation can achieve its objective of maximisation of profit by 
identifying the needs of its present and prospective buyers and 
satisfying them in an effective way. All the decisions in a firm are 
taken from the point of view of the customers.Customer’s 
satisfaction becomes the focal point of all decision making in the 
organisation. 
The Societal Marketing Concept- The business orientation 
should not be short-sighted to serve only consumers’ needs. It 
should also consider large issues of long-term social welfare.The 
societal marketing concept holds that the task of any 
organisation is to identify the needs and wants of the target 
market and deliver the desired satisfaction in an effective and 
efficient manner so that the long-term well-being of the 
consumers and the society is taken care of. 
  
 
1+2=3 
(any 2) 
23   (i) Participants: The participants in the capital market are 
financial institutions, banks, corporate entities, foreign investors 
and ordinary retail investors from members of the public. 
Participation in the money market is by and large undertaken by 
institutional participants such as the RBI, banks, financial 
institutions and finance companies.  
(ii) Instruments: The main instruments traded in the capital 
market are – equity shares, debentures, bonds, preference 
shares etc. The main instruments traded in the money market 
are short term debt instruments such as T-bills, trade bills 
reports, commercial paper and certificates of deposit. 
(iii) Investment Outlay: Investment in the capital market i.e. 
securities does not necessarily require a huge financial outlay. 
The value of units of securities is generally low i.e. Rs 10, Rs 100 
and so is the case with a minimum trading lot of shares which is 
kept small i.e. 5, 50, 100 or so. This helps individuals with small 
savings to subscribe to these securities. In the money market, 
transactions entail huge sums of money as the instruments are 
quite expensive. 
(iv) Duration: The capital market deals in medium and long term 
securities such as equity shares and debentures. Money market 
instruments have a maximum tenure of one year, and may even 
be issued for a single day. 
(v) Liquidity: Capital market securities are considered liquid 
investments because they are marketable on the stock 
exchanges. However, a share may not be actively traded, i.e. it 
may not easily find a buyer. Money market instruments on the 
other hand, enjoy a higher degree of liquidity as there is formal 
arrangement for this. The Discount Finance House of India 
(DFHI) has been established for the specific objective of 
providing a ready market for money market instruments. 
(vi) Safety: Capital market instruments are riskier both with 
respect to returns and principal repayment. But the money 
market is generally much safer with a minimum risk of default. 
This is due to the shorter duration of investing and also to 
financial soundness of the issuers, which primarily are the 
government, banks and highly rated companies. 
(vii) Expected return: The investment in capital markets generally 
yield a higher return for investors than the money markets. The 
possibility of earnings is higher if the securities are held for a 
longer duration. 
                                               OR 
B)Protective functions performed by Securities and Exchange 
Board of India: 
 
1X3=3 
(Any3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1×3=3 
Any 3 
1. Prohibition of fraudulent and unfair trade practices like making 
mis- leading statements, manipulations, price rigging etc. 
2. Controlling insider trading and imposing penalties for such 
practices. 
3. Undertaking steps for investor protection. 
4. Promotion of fair practices and code of conduct in the 
securities market. 
24 The level at which necessary workforce would be appointed  for 
implementing and controlling the plans and strategies is Middle 
Level. He is required to do the following to carry out the main 
task at the Middle Level :( any two) 
(i) interpret the policies framed by top management, 
(ii) ensure that their department has the necessary personnel, 
(iii) assign necessary duties and responsibilities to them, 
(iv) motivate them to achieve desired objectives 
 (v) co- operate with other departments for smooth functioning of 
the organisation. At the same time they are responsible for all the 
activities of first line managers. 
 
  a)1 mark for 
identification 
b)1x2=2 
 
(Any2) 
25 A) a) Customer support services- Customer support services such 
as after sales services, handling customer complaints and 
adjustments, procuring credit services, maintenance services, 
technical services and consumer information aim at providing 
maximum satisfaction to the custom ers, which is the key to 
marketing success. They are very effective in bringing repeat 
sales from the customers and developing brand loyalty for a 
product. 
b) Packaging refers to designing and developing the package for 
the products. Labelling refers to designing and developing the 
label to be put on the package. The label may vary from a simple 
tag to complex graphics. Packaging and labelling have become so 
important in modern day marketing that these are considered as 
the pillars of marketing. Packaging is important not only for 
protection of the products but also serves as a promotional tool. 
                                             OR 
B) a) Personal selling- Features 
(i) Personal Form: In personal selling a direct face-to-face dialogue 
takes place that involves an interactive relationship between the 
seller and the buyer. 
(ii) Development of Relationship: 
Personal selling allows a salesperson to develop personal 
relationships with the prospective customers, which may become 
important in making sales. 
b) Advertising-  
Features (any two) 
(i) Paid Form: Advertising is a paid form of communication. That 
is, the sponsor has to bear the cost of communicating with the 
prospects. 
(ii) Impersonality: There is no direct face-to-face contact between 
the prospect and the advertiser. It is therefore referred to as an 
impersonal method of promotion. Advertising creates a 
monologue and not a dialogue. 
(iii) Identified Sponsor: Advertising is undertaken by some 
identified individual or company, who makes the advertising efforts 
and also bears the cost of it. 
 
 
 
 
 
2×2=4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2×2=4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
26 
 A)a) Planning is pervasive: Planning is required at all 
levels of management as well as in all departments of the 
organisation. It is not an exclusive function of top 
management nor of any particular department. But the 
scope of planning differs at different levels and among 
different departments. For example, the top management 
undertakes planning for the organisation as a whole. Middle 
management does the departmental planning. At the lowest 
level, day-to-day operational planning is done. 
b) Planning is futuristic: Planning essentially involves 
looking ahead and preparing for the future. The purpose of 
planning is to meet future events effectively to the best 
advantage of an organisation. It implies peeping into the 
future, analysing it and predicting it.Through forecasting, 
future events and conditions are anticipated and plans are 
drawn accordingly.  
                                          OR 
B) a) Strategy 
A strategy provides the broad contours of an organisation’s 
business. It will also refer to future decisions defining the 
organization's direction and scope in the long run. A 
strategy is a comprehensive plan for accomplishing an 
organisation 
objectives. This comprehensive plan will include three 
dimensions, 
(i) determining long term objectives, (ii) adopting a 
particular course of action, and (iii) allocating resources 
necessary to achieve the objective. Whenever a strategy is 
formulated, the business environment needs to be taken 
into consideration.  
b) Procedure 
Procedures are routine steps on how to carry out activities. 
They detail the exact manner in which any work is to be 
performed. They are specified in a chronological 
order.Procedures are specified steps to be followed in 
particular circumstances. They are generally meant for 
insiders to follow.   
2X2 =4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2×2=4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
27 
 
 
 
  
a) The feature of the business environment highlighted is Inter 
relatedness. Different elements or parts of the business 
environment are closely inter- related. For example, increased life 
expectancy of people and increased awareness for health care 
have increased the demand for many health products and services 
like soft drinks, fat-free cooking oil, and health resorts. New health 
products and services have, in turn, changed people’s lifestyles. 
b) Any two other features : 
(i) Totality of external forces: 
Business environment is the sum total of all things external to 
business firms and, as such, is aggregative in nature. 
(ii) Specific and general forces: Business environment includes 
both specific and general forces. Specific forces (such as 
investors,customers, competitors and suppliers) affect individual 
enterprises directly and immediately in their day -to-day working. 
General forces (such as social, political, legal and technological 
conditions) have an impact on all business enterprises and thus 
may affect an individual firm indirectly. 
(iii) Relativity: Business environment is a relative concept since it 
differs from country to country and even region to region. Political 
conditions in the USA, for instance, differ from those in China or 
Pakistan. Similarly, demand for sarees may be fairly high in India 
whereas it may be almost non-existent in France. 
(iv) Dynamic nature: Business environment is dynamic in that it 
keeps on changing whether in terms of technological 
improvement, shifts in consumer preferences or entry of new 
competition in the market. 
(v) Uncertainty: Business environment is largely uncertain as it is 
very difficult to predict future happenings, especially when 
environment changes are taking place too frequently as in the 
case of information technology or fashion industries. 
(vi) Complexity: Since a business environment consists of 
numerous interrelated and dynamic conditions or forces which 
arise from different sources, it becomes difficult to comprehend at 
once what exactly constitutes a given environment. It is a complex 
phenomenon that is relatively easier to understand in parts but 
difficult to grasp in its totality. 
a) 1 mark  for 
identification +1 
mark for stating 
+ 
b)1 mark each 
for explanation  
Any 2 
28 
A good control system helps the organisation in the following 
ways: 
(i) Accomplishing organisational goals: The controlling function 
measures progress towards the organisational goals and brings 
to light the deviations, if any, and indicates corrective action. It, 
thus, guides the organisation and keeps it on the right track 
sothat organisational goals might be achieved. 
(ii) Judging accuracy of standards: A good control system 
enables management to verify whether the standards set are 
accurate and objective. An efficient control system keeps a 
careful check on the changes taking place in the organisation 
and in the environment and helps to review and revise the 
standards in light of such changes. 
(iii) Making efficient use of resources: By exercising control, a 
manager seeks to reduce wastage and spoilage of resources. 
Each activity is performed in accordance with predetermined 
standards and norms. This ensures that resources are used in 
the most effective and efficient manner. 
(iv) Improving employee motivation:A good control system 
ensures that employees know well in advance what they are 
expected to do and what are the standards of performance on 
the basis of which they will be appraised. It, thus, motivates them 
and helps them to give better performance. 
(v) Ensuring order and discipline: Controlling creates an 
atmosphere of order and discipline in the organisation. It helps to 
minimise dishonest behaviour on the part of the employees by 
keeping a close check on their activities. 
(vi) Facilitating coordination in action: Controlling provides 
direction to all activities and efforts for achieving organisational 
goals. Each department and employee is governed by pre- 
determined standards which are well coordinated with one 
another. This ensures that overall organisational objectives are 
accomplished. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1x4=4 
 
(Any4) 
 
 
 
 
 
  
29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Functional Foremanship: Taylor advocates separation of 
planning and execution functions. This concept is extended to 
the lowest level of the shop floor. Under the factory manager 
there is a planning incharge and a production incharge. Under 
planning incharge four personnel namely instruction card clerk, 
route clerk, time and cost clerk and a disciplinarian work. These 
four personnel would draft instructions for the workers, specify 
the route of production, prepare time and cost sheet and ensure 
discipline respectively. Under Production incharge, personnel 
who  work are speed boss, gang boss, repair boss, and 
inspector. These respectively are responsible for timely and 
accurate completion of jobs, keeping machines and tools etc., 
ready for operation by workers, ensure proper working 
condition of machines and tools and check the quality of 
work.Each worker has to take orders from these eight foremen.  
    1+3=4 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
30 The remaining steps in selection process are: 
(i)Selection Decision: The final decision has to be made from 
among the candidates who pass the tests, interviews and 
reference checks. The views of the concerned manager will be 
generally considered in the final selection because it is he/she 
who is responsible for the performance of the new employee. 
(ii) Medical Examination: After the selection decision and before 
the job offer is made, the candidate is required to undergo a 
medical fitness test. The job offer is given to the candidate being 
declared fit after the medical examination. 
(iii) Job Offer: The next step in the selection process is job offer 
to those applicants who have passed all the previous hurdles. 
Job offer is made through a letter of appointment/confirm his 
acceptance. The appointee must be given reasonable time for 
reporting. 
(iv)Contract of Employment: After the job offer has been made 
and the candidate accepts the offer, certain documents need to 
be executed by the employer and the candidate like the 
attestation form. This form contains certain vital details about the 
candidate, which are authenticated and attested by him or her. 
Attestation form will be a valid record for future reference. Basic 
information that should be included in a written contract of 
employment are: Job Title, Duties, Responsibilities, Date when 
continuous employment starts and the basis for calculating 
service, rates of pay, allowances, hours of work, leave rules, 
sickness, grievance procedure, disciplinary procedure, work 
rules, termination of employment. 
 
 
 
 
1x4=4 
 
31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
a)The concept of Financial Management discussed is Working 
Capital Decision. 
Working capital decisions are concerned with the decisions about 
the levels of cash, inventory and receivables. These decisions 
affect the day-to-day working of a business.  
b) The factors that will affect the choice of Working capital are: 
1.Credit Allowed: Different firms allow different credit terms to their 
customers. These depend upon the level of competition that a firm 
faces as well as the credit worthiness of their clientele. A liberal 
credit policy results in a higher amount of debto rs, increasing the 
requirement of working capital. 
 2. Availability of Raw Material: if the raw materials and other 
required materials are available freely and continuously, lower 
stock levels may suffic e. The time lag between the placement of 
order and the actual receipt of the materials (also called lead time) 
is also relevant. Larger the lead time, larger the quantity of material 
to be stored and larger shall be the amount of working capital 
required.  
a)1 mark for 
identification+1 
mark for stating 
  + 
b)2x2=4 
=6 
 
  
32 a)  Leadership- Leadership is the process of influencing the 
behaviour of people by making them strive voluntarily towards 
achievement of organisational goals. 
 b) Any four features: 
(i) Leadership indicates the ability of an individual to influence 
others. 
(ii) Leadership tries to bring change in the behaviour of others. 
(iii)Leadership indicates interpersonal relations between leaders 
and followers. 
(iv) Leadership is exercised to achieve common goals of the 
organisation. 
(v) Leadership is a continuous process. 
 
(1+1=2) 
   + 
(1x4=4) 
=6 
33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a) The types of framework highlighted are Functional Structure 
and Divisional Structure. 
a. Distinction between Functional Structure and Divisional 
Structure: 
                             (any four) 
 
Basis Functional 
Structure 
Divisional Structure 
Formation Formation is 
based on functions  
Formation is based on 
product lines and is 
supported by functions. 
Specialisation Functional 
specialisation. 
Product specialisation.  
Responsibility Difficult to fix on a 
department.  
Easy to fix responsibility 
for 
performance. 
Managerial 
Development  
Difficult, as each 
functional 
manager 
has to report to the 
top management  
Easier, autonomy as well 
as the chance to perform 
multiple 
functions helps in 
managerial 
development. 
(1+1=2) 
     + 
(1x4=4) 
    =6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34. 
 
 
 
 
  
Cost Functions are not 
duplicated hence 
economical.  
Duplication of resources 
in 
various departments, 
hence 
costly.  
Coordination  Difficult for a multi- 
product company.  
Easy, because all 
functions related to a 
particular 
product are integrated in 
one 
department. 
 
A) Reliefs available to a consumer under Consumer Protection 
Act, 2019(any six): 
(i) To remove the defect in goods or deficiency in service. 
(ii) To replace the defective product with a new one, free from 
any defect. 
(iii) To refund the price paid for the product, or the charges paid 
for 
the service. 
(iv) To pay a reasonable amount of compensation for any loss or 
injury suffered by the consumer due to the negligence of the 
opposite party. 
(v) To pay punitive damages in appropriate circumstances. 
(vi) To discontinue the unfair/ restrictive trade practice and not 
to repeat it in the future. 
(vii) Not to offer hazardous goods for sale. 
(viii) To withdraw the hazardous goods from sale. 
(ix) To cease manufacture of hazardous goods and to desist from 
offering hazardous services. 
(x) To pay any amount (not less than 5% of the value of the 
defective 
goods or deficient services provided), to be credited to the 
Consumer Welfare Fund or any other organisation/person, to be 
utilised in the prescribed manner. 
 
 
 
 
 
1X6=6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1x6=6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(xi) To issue corrective advertisement to neutralise the effect of a 
misleading advertisement. 
(xii) To pay adequate costs to the appropriate party. 
                                            OR 
B)1. Right to Safety: The consumer has a right to be protected 
against goods and services which are hazardous to life and 
health. For instance, electrical appliances which are 
manufactured with substandard products or do not conform to 
the safety norms might cause serious injury. Thus, consumers 
are educated that they should use electrical appliances which are 
ISI marked as this would be an assurance of such products 
meeting quality specifications. 
2. Right to be Informed: The consumer has a right to have 
complete information about the product he intends to buy 
including its ingredients, date of manufacture, price, quantity, 
directions for use, etc.  
3. Right to Choose: The consumer has the freedom to choose 
from a variety of products at competitive prices. This implies that 
the marketers should offer a wide variety of products in terms of 
quality, brand, prices, size, etc. and allow the consumer to make 
a choice from amongst these. 
4. Right to be Heard: The consumer has a right to file a complaint 
and to be heard in case of dissatisfaction with a good or a 
service. It is because of this reason that many enlightened 
business firms have set up their own consumer service and 
grievance cells. Many consumer organisations are also working 
towards this direction and helping consumers in redressal of their 
grievances. 
5. Right to seek Redressal: The consumer has a right to get relief 
in case the product or service falls short of his expectations. The 
Consumer Protection Act provides a number of reliefs to the 
consumers including replacement of the product, removal of 
defect in the product, compensation paid for any loss or injury 
suffered by the consumer, etc. 
6. Right to Consumer Education: The consumer has a right to 
acquire knowledge and to be a well informed consumer 
throughout life. He should be aware about his rights and the 
reliefs available to him in case of a product or service. 
 
                                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
1x6=6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- END BusinessStudies-MS 2025-26.pdf ---
--- START BusinessStudies-SQP-2024-25.pdf ---
1 
BUSINESS STUDIES (054)  
CLASS XII (2024-25) 
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER  
 
TIME: 3 HOURS                                                                         M.M. – 80 
• This question paper contains 34 questions. 
• Marks are indicated against each question. 
• Answers should be brief and to the point. 
• Answers to the questions carrying 3 marks may be from 50 to 75 words. 
• Answers to the questions carrying 4 marks may be about 150 words. 
• Answers to the questions carrying 6 marks may be about 200 words. 
 
Q.NO. QUESTION MARKS 
1. The newly appointed Production Manager of Saheb Ltd., a firm manufacturing 
toys, Mr Ahrawat noticed that the workers in the factory were not giving their 
best as the physical conditions in the factory were not good. He conducted an 
experiment to see the effect of improvement in the physi cal conditions in the 
factory on the performance of the workers, by providing adequate ventilation 
and water facilities. He observed that the fatigue level of the workers reduced.  
 The nature of management being highlighted in the above case is: 
A. Management as science 
B. Management as profession 
C. Management as art 
D. Both A. and C. 
1 
2. Jasmine Ahluwalia is the manager of an artefacts museum's marketing team, 
responsible for promoting exhibitions and events. In the previous season, she 
defined the total work of managing the events into graphic designing, 
registration inquiries, bill payments, etc, in order to facilitate specialisation. 
However, instead of allocating work, she had assigned each team member the 
full responsibility of managing the promotion of an en tire event. In spite of 
holding regular team meetings to take feedback, Jasmine found problems 
throughout the events season in the quality of graphic design, registration 
inquiry, bill payments, etc,. 
For the upcoming events season, Jasmine has decided to divide these 
responsibilities on the basis of her observation of the areas in which the  
individual team members have excelled in the  previous season and allocate 
the roles based on their skills and competencies. 
 Identify the step in the organising process which was not  properly performed 
in the previous season but has been duly performed for the upcoming season. 
A. Identification and division of work  
B. Establishing reporting relationships  
C. Departmentalisation 
D. Assignment of duties 
1 
3. Read the following statements: Assertion (A) and Reason (R). Choose the 
correct alternative from those given below:  
1 
2 
Assertion(A):  Financial Planning aims at enabling the company to tackle 
the uncertainty in respect of the availability and timing of the funds. 
Reason(R):  Capital structure refers to the mix between owners’ and borrowed 
funds 
Alternatives : 
A. Both Assertion (A) is false and Reason (R) are true. 
B. Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are false. 
C. Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true, but Reason (R) is not 
the correct explanation of the Assertion. 
D. Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true, and  Reason (R) is the 
correct explanation of the Assertion. 
4. Read the following statements carefully: 
Statement I: Secondary Market directly promotes capital formation. 
Statement lI: Capital market deals in medium and long term securities such 
as equity shares and debentures. 
In the light of given statements, choose the correct alternative from the 
following: 
A. Both the statements are true. 
B. Both the statements are false. 
C. Statement I is true, Statement II is false. 
D. Statement II is true, Statement I is false. 
1 
 5. Choose the statement that correctly highlights the benefit of using external 
sources of recruitment. 
A. Competitive spirit among the existing staff  
B. Reduction in employees turnover 
C. Helps in increasing employees satisfaction  
D. Develops a sense of security amongst employees  
1 
 
 
6. Goodwill Enterprises is a large-scale automobile manufacturer, who fulfills the 
needs of both industrial users and consumers. The company is providing easy 
finance facilities at a low rate of interest, which has considerably increased the 
demand for the product.  The company has installed a new branch 
management software to efficiently manage and coordinate activities across 
their multiple branches and locations.  
Identify the components of the business environment from the above case 
study. 
A. Political and economic environment 
B. Economic and social environment  
C. Technological and legal environment  
D. Economic and technological environment     
 1 
7. 
 
 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
Identify the responsibility that a consumer fulfills when he looks for the quality 
marks given above: 
A. Assert yourself to ensure that you get a fair deal 
B. Getting a proper receipt 
C. Buy only standardised products 
D. Be honest in your dealings 
 
For Visually Impaired Candidates: 
When a consumer looks for FPO mark while purchasing a bottle of jam or 
hallmark when purchasing jewellery, which consumer responsibility has he 
kept in mind: 
A. Assert yourself to ensure that you get a fair deal 
B. Getting a proper receipt  
C. Buy only standardised products 
D. Be honest in your dealings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
8. Read the following statements: Assertion (A) and Reason (R). Choose the 
correct alternative from those given below:  
ASSERTION (A): Controlling can prevent deviations. 
REASON (R): Controlling helps in minimising deviations by taking actions 
and decisions that reduce their recurrence. 
A. Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true and Reason is the correct 
explanation of Assertion. 
B. Both Assertion(A) and Reason  (R) are true and Reason is not the 
correct explanation of Assertion. 
C. Assertion (A) is true, Reason (R) is false. 
D. Assertion(A) is false, Reason(R) is true. 
 1 
9. ‘Joining a job marks the beginning of socialisation of employees at the 
workplace. The employee should be given a post for which he has been 
selected.’ 
Place the subsequent steps of staffing in a small organisation in  the correct 
order: 
A. Training and development, promotion and career planning, 
performance appraisal, compensation  
B. Performance appraisal, training and development, promotion and 
career planning, compensation  
C. Training and development, performance appraisal, promotion and 
career planning, compensation 
D. Training and development, performance appraisal, compensation, 
promotion and career planning 
 1 
10. Spiceworks, a company providing financial services to its clients is keeping a 
close check on the employee’s activities by using biometric and retina 
scanning as modes of accessing the office premises, in order to ensure greater 
security of information in the organisation. 
Choose the correct point of significance of controlling highlighted above: 
A. controlling helps in achievement of organisational goals 
B. controlling helps in ensuring order and discipline 
C. controlling helps in improving employees motivation  
D. controlling enables optimum utilisation of resources  
1  
4 
11. Identify the incorrect statement with respect to  ‘Investment decision’: 
A. Net working capital refers to excess of current assets over current 
liabilities 
B. Current assets are those assets which get converted into cash within 
one year 
C. Capital budgeting decisions are irreversible. 
D. Size of the assets, Profitability and competitiveness are not affected 
by capital budgeting decisions. 
 1 
12. State Commission has the jurisdiction to entertain complaints where value of 
goods and services paid as consideration is ________ 
A. More than ₹1 crore and not more than ₹ 5 crore 
B. More than ₹10 crore 
C. Less than ₹1 crore 
D. More than ₹1 crore and not more than ₹10 crore 
 1 
13. Match the statements given in column I with the characteristic of business 
environment given in column II 
 COLUMN I  COLUMN II 
(a) Increased demand of Khakhra and Thepla 
in the region of Gujarat as compared to 
Delhi region 
i. Uncertainty 
(b) Digital academic certificates are issued to 
students accessible in a secured manner to 
eliminate undesirable practices like 
corruption and manipulation of records 
under Digital India Initiative. Such 
technological improvements are happening 
at a very fast pace. 
ii. Dynamic 
(c) Fashion market is facing both opportunities 
and challenges. Therefore it is difficult to 
predict the future of the fashion market. 
Iii. Relativity 
(d) A new government will result in changing 
government rules, fiscal policies, market 
conditions etc 
Iv. Interrelatedness 
Choose the correct option from the following: 
A. (a)-(iii), (b)-(ii), (c)-(i), (d)-(iv) 
B. (a)-(ii), (b)-(i), (c)-(iii), (d)-(iv) 
C. (a)-(iv), (b)-(ii), (c)-(i), (d)-(iii) 
D. (a)-(iii), (b)-(i), (c)-(ii), (d)-(iv) 
1 
14. The process of classification of products into different groups, on the basis of 
some of the important characteristics such as quality, size, etc. is known as: 
A. Branding 
B. Standardisation 
C. Grading  
D. Marketing planning 
 1 
5 
15. Shiwakumar runs a legal consultancy firm in Chhattisgarh. Whenever the firm 
hires new employees, on the first day of joining, they are welcomed to the 
organisation and are given details about the dress code, lunch timings, 
introduction to daily operations and fellow colleagues. They are also 
familiarised with the organisational policies and procedures, emergency exits, 
evacuation procedure, etc. 
Name the type of training which is provided by Shiwakumar in his firm. 
A. Apprenticeship training 
B. Vestibule training 
C. Induction training 
D. Internship training 
 1 
16. Identify the incorrect statement with respect to Consumer Protection in India. 
A. It not only includes educating consumers about their rights and 
responsibilities but also helps in getting their grievances redressed 
B. It not only requires a judicial machinery for protecting the interest of 
consumers but also requires the consumers to get together and form 
themselves into Consumer associations for protection and promotion of 
their interests. 
C. It is the moral duty of any business to take care of consumers' interest 
and avoid any form of exploitation. 
D. The provisions of Consumer Protection Act came into force from 
1981. 
 1 
17. Identify the decision which is not taken under financial management. 
A. Dividend Decision 
B. Capital Budgeting Decision 
C. Pricing Decision 
D. Both B. and C.  
1 
18. What are the factors that affect financing decisions? 
(a) Cash flow position of the company 
(b) Stability of earnings 
(c) Degree of financial risk 
(d) Contractual constraints 
(e) State of capital market 
(f) Level of competition 
Choose the correct alternative from the following: 
A. (b), (c) and (f) 
B. (d), (e) and (f) 
C. (a), (c) and (d) 
D. (a), (c) and (e) 
1 
19. Consumers can ask anything regarding the date of manufacturing, MRP, etc, 
about the product that he intend to buy. 
Identify the consumer right highlighted in the above lines. 
A. Right to be informed 
B. Right to be assured 
C. Right to be heard 
D. Right to safety  
1 
20. Read the following statements carefully: 
Statement I: Cost of debt is lower than cost of equity for  a company. 
1 
6 
Statement II: The objective of financial management is to increase 
shareholder’s wealth. 
In the light of given statements, choose the correct alternative from the 
following: 
A. Both the statements are true. 
B. Both the statements are false. 
C. Statement I is true, Statement II is false. 
D. Statement II is true, Statement I is false. 
21.(A) 
 
21.(B)  
 
State the meaning of single use plans and standing plans  
OR 
State how planning  
(I) reduces creativity 
(II) leads to rigidity. 
 3 
 
 
1 ½  
1 ½  
22. (A) 
 
 
22. (B) 
Explain the concept of leadership. Give two situations in which autocratic 
leadership style is most effective. 
OR 
Explain the concept of communication. Give the meaning of formal and 
informal communication. 
 3 
 
 
3 
23. From the following information regarding Aditya Ltd. which is in the business 
of manufacturing green tea, calculate the Return on Investment and Interest 
Coverage Ratio of the company: (Show working) 
Earning before interest and tax                                  ₹ 15,00,000 
10% debentures                                                         ₹ 12,00,000 
Equity Share Capital (₹10 each)                                ₹ 18,00,000  
Tax Rate                                                                             40% 
3 
24. Mr Vivek Vaswani, a foodpreneur  combined his passion for food with his 
entrepreneurial skills and started his innovative fast food outlet OH CHILLI! in 
2021. He had started his career as a food blogger and had noticed that 
numerous Indian consumers were  looking  for reasonable and pure vegetarian 
fast food options for dining out. The high end restaurants were not opted by 
many as they were exorbitantly priced. Though many global fast food chains 
were running across the country, yet not many outlets offered reasonable and 
healthy pure vegetarian fast food options to consumers. OH CHILLI! became 
a pioneer in offering a healthy and delicious variety of food. 
What came as a surprise for consumers was that even without using onion or 
garlic in the pasta sauce, marinade and ketchup ,the food could actually taste 
great. The company witnessed an increase in  net profit of 26% in its second 
financial year and became a market leader. 
(I)  State the concept of business environment. 
(II)  Identify and explain in what way, a good understanding of business 
environment enabled Mr. Vivek Vaswani to improve the performance of the 
enterprise.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
2 
  
 
25. The General manager of a reputed organisation, Mr. Agastaya Lokhande, 
made the following announcement at the Annual General Meeting of the 
company- “When we think of a brand,  we think of reputation, but the reputation 
is made or broken by the quality of p roducts and customer representation. If 
people are miserable, they can't give their best work and the brand suffers. On 
  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
the contrary, positive results can be observed if there is job satisfaction, 
effective and efficient functioning.” 
(I) Identify and explain the feature of management discussed by Mr Agastaya 
in his announcement. 
(II) Explain any three reasons that make management important to any 
organisation. 
 
 
1 
 
3 
26. (A) 
 
 
 
26. (B) 
 
In order to streamline the selection procedure, so as to minimise the margin 
of errors, certain tests are carried out that attempt to measure the 
characteristics of individuals. Explain any four such tests. 
OR 
Since jobs have become more complex, the importance of employee training 
has increased. Training programmes provide numerous benefits to workers. 
Explain any four points that support this statement.  
 4 
 
 
 
 
4 
27. When Bhaanupriya joined as technical head of Logic Lotus Innovators, she 
was keen on increasing the productivity and profitability of the company. 
However, she observed that the employees were demotivated as no attention 
was given to their work.  Also, the  workers were given little freedom to make 
decisions.  
Bhaanupriya decided to stimulate the employees  by giving each worker T -
shirts with their name on it. She also decided to include workers in work 
committees. This helped in improving the performance of the workers. 
(I) On the basis of the understanding of Maslow’s Need Hierarchy Theory 
of motivation, identify the human need that Bhaanupriya has recognised  
in order to make the subordinates act towards achievement of 
organisational goals. 
(II) Identify and explain two incentives that have been provided by 
Bhanupriya to improve the performance of the employees. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
3 
28. (A) 
 
 
28. (B) 
Explain how Planning and controlling are both backward looking, as well as  
forward looking functions.  
OR 
The first step in the controlling process is setting up performance standards. 
Explain the subsequent two steps in the process of controlling. 
 4 
 
 
4 
 
29. When Chandrashekhar Shukla returned to India after completing a Certificate 
course in Food Quality Assurance and Quality Control from the Netherlands, 
he was convinced that he would fulfil his grandfather's dream of converting 
their 58 acre land into a fer tile farm. He started by setting out specific goals 
and laid down related activities to be performed to achieve the goals. Soon 
he launched his own company ‘Food and Agribusiness Solutions Private 
Limited’.  
He sought to ensure that the future events effectively meet the best interest 
of the company. He prepared an annual statement for production and sales, 
based on sales forecasting. He noticed that the farmers grew only paddy due 
to which land remained idle for the subsequent 8 to 9 months of the year. He 
identified and assessed various alternatives through which farms could be 
utilised for the remaining months of the year.  
Through his accurate vision, judgement and systematic thinking based on 
analysis of the facts, he presented a scheme to the farmers where both paddy 
and vegetables could be grown.  
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Identify and explain the features of one of the functions of Management 
highlighted above. 
 
30. Give any four points of difference between advertising and personal selling. 4 
31. It was established by the Government of India on 12 April 1988 as an interim 
administrative body to promote orderly and healthy growth of the securities 
market and for investor protection. It was given statutory status in 1992 
through an Act of Parliament.  
(I)  Identify the regulatory body which has been highlighted above. 
(II)  State the three objectives of the regulatory body identified in part (I). 
(III)  State any two functions that are performed for the development of the 
securities market by the regulatory body identified in part (I).    
  
 
 
 
1 
3 
2 
 
32. (A) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32. (B) 
Differentiate between functional structure and divisional structure on the basis 
of: 
(I) Formation    
(II) Specialisation  
(III) Responsibility 
(IV) Managerial development 
(V) Cost 
(VI) Coordination  
OR 
‘Delegation helps a manager to extend his area of operations as without it, his 
activities would be restricted to only what he  himself can do.’ 
In light of the above statement, explain how effective delegation helps the 
organisation in achieving objectives. 
 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
33. Leena has been appointed as the Operations Manager in a small trading 
company dealing in garments, with growing online sales. The company has 
recently rented space in a warehouse to store garments and mail out orders. 
In order to take over the responsibilities of order fulfilment, Leena promotes an 
associate, Kushagra to the post of Inventory and Order fulfilment  Supervisor. 
Kushagra has been given the task to assess whether it is best to process 
orders as they come in or let them accumulate and then to pr ocess them in 
batches. He concludes that accumulating and then processing them in 
batches is the best way of fulfilling orders, in order to minimise cost and 
maximise customer satisfaction. 
Through several readings Leena  finds that the standard time taken from the 
placement of order to the delivery of garments for a batch of  100 pieces is 72 
hours. This helped her to determine the labour cost.  
On the basis of the understanding of concepts of scientific management,  
identify and explain the techniques used by Leena and Kushagra to improve 
the performance of the employees. 
 6 
34. (A) 
 
34. (B) 
Explain the four elements of marketing mix. 
OR 
Explain any four factors affecting determination of the price of a product or 
service. 
 6 
 
6 
                                          

--- END BusinessStudies-SQP-2024-25.pdf ---
--- START BusinessStudies-MS-2024-25.pdf ---
1 
BUSINESS STUDIES (054) 
 Class XII (2024-25) 
MARKING SCHEME 
Q.NO. ANSWER MARKS 
1. A. Management as science 1 
2. D. Assignment of duties 1 
3. C. Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are  true, but Reason (R) is not the 
correct explanation of the Assertion. 
1 
4. D. Statement II is true, Statement I is false 1 
5. A. Competitive spirit among the existing staff  1 
6. D. Economic and technological environment     1 
7. C. Buy only standardised products  
For Visually Impaired Candidates: 
C. Buy only standardised products 
1 
 
1 
8. D. Assertion (A) is false, Reason (R) is true 1 
9. C. Training and development, performance appraisal, promotion and career 
planning, compensation  
1 
10. B. controlling helps in ensuring order and discipline 1 
11. D. Size of the assets, Profitability and competitiveness are not affected by 
capital budgeting decisions. 
1 
12. D. More than ₹1 crore and not more than ₹10 crore 1 
13. A. (a)-(iii), (b)-(ii), (c)-(i), (d)-(iv) 1 
14. C. Grading 1 
15. C. Induction training 1 
16. D. The provisions of the Consumer Protection Act came into force from 
1981. 
1 
17. C. Pricing decision 1 
18. D. (a), (c) and (e) 1 
19. A. Right to be informed 1 
20. A. Both the statements are true. 1 
21. (A) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21. (B) 
Single Use plans - A single-use plan is developed for a one -time event or 
project. Such a course of action is not likely to be repeated in future, i.e., they 
are for non-recurring situations.The duration of this plan may depend upon 
the type of the project. It may span a week or a month or a day. 
Standing plans -A standing plan is used for activities that occur regularly 
over a period of time. It is designed to ensure that internal operations of an 
organisation run smoothly. Such a plan greatly enhances efficiency in routine 
decision-making. It is usually develop ed once but is modified from time to 
time to meet business needs as required. 
OR 
Planning  reduces creativity - Planning is an activity which is done by the 
top management. Usually the rest of the members just implement these 
1 ½  
 
 
 
 
1 ½  
 
 
 
 
 
1 ½  
2 
plans. As a consequence, middle management and other decision makers 
are neither allowed to deviate from plans nor are they permitted to act on 
their own.Thus, planning in a way reduces creativity since people tend to 
think along the same lines as others. 
 
Planning leads to rigidity -In an organisation, a well -defined plan is drawn 
up with specific goals to be achieved within a specific time frame. These 
plans then decide the future course of action and managers may not be in a 
position to change it. Following a pre -decided plan, when circumstances 
have changed, may not turn out to be in the organisation's interest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 ½  
 
22. (A) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22. (B) 
Leadership is the process of influencing the behaviour of people by making 
them strive voluntarily towards achievement of organisational goals. 
Two situations in which Autocratic leadership is most effective: 
• This leadership style is effective in getting productivity in many 
situations like in a factory where the supervisor is responsible for 
production on time and the supervisor has to ensure labour 
productivity.  
• Quick decision-making is facilitated. 
OR 
Communication is the process of exchange of information between two or 
more persons to reach common understanding. 
Meaning of formal communication: 
Formal communication flows through official channels designed in the 
organisation chart.  
Meaning of Informal communication: 
Communication that takes place without following the formal lines of 
communication is said to be informal communication.  
 1 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
1 
 
1 
 
 
1 
 
 
1 
23. Calculation of Return on Investment (ROI) 
 ROI= Earnings before interest and tax  x100 
                      Total investment  
  ROI =  1500000     x100 
              3000000  
           =50%    
Calculation of Interest Coverage Ratio (ICR)     
 Interest coverage ratio = Earnings before interest and tax 
                                                   Interest 
       ICR =   1500000 
                    120000 
                =12.5 times 
 
½  
 
½  
 
½  
 
½  
 
½  
 
½  
  
24. (I) Business Environment means the sum total of all individuals, institutions 
and other forces that are outside the control of a business enterprise but that 
may affect its performance.  
(II) It enables the firm to identify opportunities and getting the firs t 
mover advantage: Opportunities refer to the positive external trends or 
changes that will help a firm to improve its performance. Environment 
provides numerous opportunities for business success. Early identification of 
opportunities helps an enterprise to be the first to exploit them instead of 
losing them to competitors 
1 
 
 
½ + 1 ½  
 
3 
25. (I) Management is an intangible force: Management is an intangible force 
that cannot be seen but its presence can be felt in the way the organisation 
functions. The effect of management is noticeable in an organisation where 
targets are met according to plans, employees are happy and satisfied, and 
there is orderliness instead of chaos. 
(II) Importance of management: (Any three) 
• Management helps in achieving group goals:  Management is 
required not for itself but for achieving the goals of the organisation. 
The task of a manager is to give a common direction to the individual 
effort in achieving the overall goal of the organisation.  
• Management increases efficiency:  The aim of a manager is to 
reduce costs and increase productivity through better planning, 
organising, directing, staffing and controlling the activities of the 
organisation. 
• Management creates a dynamic organisation: All organisations 
have to function in an environment which is constantly changing. It is 
generally seen that individuals in an organisation resist change as it 
often means moving from a familiar, secure environment into a newer 
and more challenging one. Management helps people adapt to these 
changes so that the organisation is able to maintain its competitive 
edge.  
• Management helps in achieving personal objectives : A manager 
motivates and leads his team in such a manner that individual 
members are able to achieve personal goals while contributing to the 
overall organisational objective. 
• Management helps in the development of society: An  organisation 
has multiple objectives to serve the purpose of the different groups 
that constitute it. In the process of fulfilling all these, management 
helps in the development of the organisation and through that it helps 
in the development of society.  
½ + ½  
 
 
 
 
 
1 x 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26. (A) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Selection tests (Any four): 
• Intelligence Tests: This is one of the important psychological tests used 
to measure the level of intelligence quotient of an individual. It is an 
indicator of a person’s learning ability or the ability to make decisions 
and judgments.  
• Aptitude Test: It is a measure of an individual's potential for learning 
new skills. It indicates the person’s capacity to develop. 
• Personality Tests : Personality tests provide clues to a person’s 
emotions, her reactions, maturity and value system etc. These tests 
probe the overall personality. Hence, these are difficult to design and 
implement. 
• Trade Test: These tests measure the existing skills of the individual. 
They measure the level of knowledge and proficiency in the area of 
professions or technical training. The difference between aptitude test 
and trade test is that the former measures the potential to acquire 
skills and the later the actual skills possessed.  
 
 
1X4=4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
26. (B) 
• Interest Tests: Every individual has a fascination for some job more 
than the other. Interest tests are used to know the pattern of interests 
or involvement of a person. 
OR 
Benefit of training to workers: 
• Improved skills and knowledge due to training lead to better careers for 
the individual. 
• Increased performance by the individual helps him to earn more. 
• Training makes the employee more efficient to handle machines. Thus, 
less prone to accidents.  
• Training increases the satisfaction and morale of employees. 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
1 
1 
 
1 
27. (I) Esteem Needs 
(II) 
• Employee Recognition programmes:  Recognition means 
acknowledgment with a show of appreciation. When such 
appreciation is given to the work performed by employees, they feel 
motivated to perform/work at a higher level.  
• Employee Participation :It means involving employees in decision 
making of the issues related to them. In many companies, these 
programmes are in practice in the form of joint management 
committees, work committees, canteen committees etc. 
1 
 
 
½ + 1   
 
 
 
½ + 1  
 
28.(A) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28.(B) 
Plans are prepared for the future and are based on forecasts about future 
conditions. Therefore, planning involves looking ahead and is called a 
forward-looking function. 
On the contrary, controlling is like a postmortem of past activities to find out 
deviations from the standards. In that sense, controlling is a backward 
looking function.  
However, planning is guided by past experiences and the corrective action 
initiated by the control function aims to improve future performance. Thus, 
planning and controlling are both backward -looking as well as a 
forward-looking function.  
OR 
• Measurement of Actual Performance : Once performance standards 
are set, the next step is measurement of actual performance. 
Performance should be measured in an objective and reliable manner. 
There are several techniques for measurement of performance. These 
include personal observation, sample checking, performance reports. 
• Comparing Actual Performance with Standards : This step involves 
comparison of actual performance with the standard. Such comparison 
will reveal the deviation between actual and desired results. Comparison 
becomes easier when standards are set in quantitative terms. 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
½ + 1½  
 
 
 
 
½ + 1½ 
 
29. 
 
 Features of Planning 
(1)  Planning focuses on achieving objectives: Organisations are set up 
with a general purpose in view. Specific goals are set out in the plans 
along with the activities to be undertaken to achieve the goals. Thus, 
planning is purposeful. Planning has no meaning unless it contributes to 
the achievement of predetermined organisational goals. 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
5 
(2)  Planning is futuristic: Planning essentially involves looking ahead and 
preparing for the future. The purpose of planning is to meet future events 
effectively to the best advantage of an organisation. It implies peeping 
into the future, analysing it and predicting it. Planning i s, therefore, 
regarded as a forward looking function based on forecasting. 
(3)  Planning involves decision making: Planning essentially involves 
choice from among various alternatives and activities. The need for 
planning arises only when alternatives are available. In actual practice, 
planning presupposes the existence of alternatives. Planning, thus, 
involves thorough examination and evaluation of each alternative and 
choosing the most appropriate one.  
(4)  Planning is a mental exercise:Planning requires application of the mind 
involving foresight, intelligent imagination and sound judgement. It is 
basically an intellectual activity of thinking rather than doing, because 
planning determines the action to be taken. However, planning requir es 
logical and systematic thinking rather than guesswork or wishful thinking. 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
30. Following are the differences between advertising and personal selling  
(any four): 
S.No. Advertising  Personal Selling  
1. Advertising is an impersonal form 
of communication 
Personal selling is a 
personal form of 
communication. 
2. Advertising involves transmission 
of standardised messages, i.e., 
the same message is sent.  
In personal selling, the sales 
talk is adjusted keeping view 
of the customer's 
background and needs. 
3. Advertising is inflexible as the 
message can’ t be adjusted to the 
needs of the buyer.  
Personal selling is highly 
flexible. as the message can 
be adjusted. 
4. It reaches masses, i.e., a large 
number of people can be 
approached. 
Only a limited number of 
people can be contacted 
because of time and cost 
considerations. 
5. In advertising the cost per person 
reached is very low.  
The cost per person is quite 
high in the case of personal 
selling.  
6. Advertising can cover the market 
in a short time.  
Personal selling efforts take 
a lot of time to cover the 
entire market.  
7. Advertising makes use of mass 
media such television, radio, 
newspaper, and magazines.  
Personal selling makes use 
of sales staff, which has 
limited reach. 
1X4=4 
6 
8. Advertising lacks direct feedback. 
Marketing research efforts are 
needed to judge customers’ 
reactions to advertising 
Personal selling provides 
direct and immediate 
feedback. Sales persons 
come to know about the 
customers’ reactions 
immediately 
9. Advertising is more useful in 
creating and building interest of 
the consumers in the firm's 
products.  
Personal selling plays an 
important role at the 
awareness stage of decision 
making. 
10. Advertising is more useful in 
marketing to the ultimate 
consumers who are large in 
numbers. 
Personal selling is more 
useful in selling products to 
the industrial buyers or to 
intermediaries such as 
dealers and retailers who 
are relatively few in number. 
 
31. (I)  Securities Exchange Board of India(SEBI) 
(II)  Objectives of SEBI are (Any three) 
• to regulate the stock exchanges and the security industry to 
promote their orderly functioning. 
• to protect the rights and interest of the investors, particularly 
individual investors to guide and educate them. 
• to prevent trading Malpractices and achieve a balance between 
self regulation by the security industries and its statutory 
regulation. 
• to regulate and develop a code of conduct and fair practices, by 
intermediaries like brokers, merchant  brokers etc. with a view of 
making them competitive and professional. 
 (III) Developmental functions: (Any two) 
• Training of intermediaries of the securities market.  
• Conducting research and publishing information useful to all market  
participants. 
• Undertaking measures to develop the capital markets by adapting a 
flexible approach. 
1 
 
 
 
1✕3=3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1x2=2 
 
32. (A) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Difference between Functional and Divisional structure 
Basis Functional Structure Divisional Structure 
(I) Formation Formation is based 
on functions 
Formation is based on 
product lines and is 
supported by functions. 
Specialisation  
(II) Specialisation  
 
Functional 
specialisation. 
Product specialisation. 
 1X6=6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32. (B) 
(III) Responsibility  Difficult to fix on a 
department. 
 Easy to fix responsibility for 
performance 
(IV)Managerial 
Development 
Difficult, as each 
functional manager 
has to report to the 
top management. 
Easier, autonomy as well as 
the chance to perform 
multiple functions helps in 
managerial development 
(V) Cost Functions are not 
duplicated hence 
economical. 
Duplication of resources in 
various departments, hence 
costly. 
(VI) Coordination Difficult for a 
multiproduct 
company 
Easy, because all functions 
related to a particular 
product are integrated in one 
department. 
 OR 
SIGNIFICANCE OF DELEGATION: 
(i) Effective management: By empowering the employees, the managers are 
able to function more efficiently as they get more time to concentrate on 
important matters.  
(ii) Employee development:  As a result of delegation, employees get more 
opportunities to utilise their talent and this may give rise to latent abilities in 
them.  It makes them better leaders and decision makers. 
(iii) Motivation of employees:  Delegation helps in developing the talents of 
the employees. It also has psychological benefits. Responsibility for work 
build the self-esteem of an employee and improves his confidence.  
(iv) Facilitation of growth:  Delegation helps in the expansion of an 
organisation by providing a ready workforce to take up leading positions in 
new ventures.  
(v) Basis of management hierarchy: Delegation of authority establishes 
superior-subordinate relationships, which are the basis of hierarchy of 
management.  
(vi) Better coordination:  The elements of delegation help to define the 
powers, duties and answerability related to the various positions in an 
organisation. This helps to avoid overlapping of duties and duplication of 
work. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1X6=6 
 
33. Various techniques used by Leena to improve the performance of her 
employees: 
Method Study-The objective of method study is to find out one best way of 
doing the job. To determine the best way there are several parameters.  
Right from procurement of raw materials till the final product is delivered to  
the customer every activity is part of method study. Taylor devised the 
concept of assembly line by using method study. The objective  is to minimise 
the cost of production and maximise the quality and satisfaction of the 
customer. 
Time Study-It determines the standard time taken to perform a    well-defined 
job. The standard time is fixed for the whole of the task by taking several 
 
 
 
½ + 2 ½  
 
 
 
 
 
 
½ + 2 ½  
8 
readings. The method of time study will depend upon volume and frequency 
of the task, the cycle time of the operation and time measurement costs. 
The objective of time study is to determine the number of workers to be 
employed; frame suitable incentive schemes and determine labour costs. 
34. (A) Following are the four elements of marketing mix: 
1. PRODUCT: Product means goods or services or ‘anything of value’, 
which is offered to the market for sale. The concept of product relates to 
not only the physical product  but also the benefits offered by it from 
customer’s view point. It also includes the extended product or what is 
offered to the customers by way of after sales services, handling 
complaints, availability of spare parts etc.The important product 
decisions include deciding about the features, quality, packaging, 
labelling and branding of the products. 
2. PRICE: Price is the amount of money customers have to pay to obtain 
the product. In the case of most of the products, the level of price affects 
the level of their demand. The marketers have not only to decide about 
the objectives of price setting but to analyse the factors determining the 
price and fix a price for the firm’s products. Decisions have also to be 
taken in respect of discounts to customers, traders and credit terms, etc., 
so that customers perceive the price to be in line with the value of the  
product. 
3. PLACE: Place or Physical Distribution include activities that make a 
firm's products available to the target customers. Important decision 
areas in this respect include selection of dealers or intermediaries to 
reach the customers, providing support to the intermediaries (by way of 
discounts, promotional campaigns, etc.). The other decision areas relate 
to managing inventory, storage and warehousing and transportation of 
the goods from the place it is produced to the place it is required by the 
buyers. 
4. PROMOTION: Promotion of products and services include activities that 
communicate availability, features, merits, etc., of the products to the 
target customers and persuade them to buy it.  Most marketing 
organisations use a number of tools such as advertising, personal 
selling and sales promotion techniques like price discounts, free 
coupons etc. 
 
 
½ + 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
½ + 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
½ + 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
½ + 1 
 
 
34. (B) 
OR 
 Factors affecting price of a product: (any four) 
1. Product Cost: One of the most important factors affecting the price of a 
product or service is its cost. This includes the cost of producing, distributing 
and selling the product. The cost sets the minimum level or the floor price at 
which the product may be sold.In th e long run, a firm cannot survive unless 
at least all its costs are covered. There are broadly three types of costs: viz  
Fixed Costs, Variable Costs and Semi Variable Costs. 
2. The utility and demand : While the product costs set the lower limits of 
the price, the utility provided by the product and the intensity of demand of 
the buyer sets the upper limit of price, which a buyer would be prepared to 
pay. The buyer may be ready to pay up to the point where the utility from the 
product is at least equal to the sacrifice made in terms of the price paid. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(½ + 1)  
 x 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
3. Extent of competition in the market:  The price will tend to reach the 
upper limit in case there is lesser degree of competition while under 
conditions of free competition, the price will tend to be set at the lowest level. 
4. Government and legal regulations: In order to protect the interest of 
public against unfair practices in the field of price fixing, Government can 
intervene and declare a product as essential product and regulate it’s price. 
In such a case, the Government does not allow the firms to charge  such a 
high price and intervene to regulate the price of the product. 
5. Pricing objectives: Apart from profit maximisation, the pricing objectives 
of a firm may include: (a) Obtaining Market Share Leadership: If a firm's 
objective is to obtain larger share of the market; it will keep the price of its 
products at lower levels so that greater num ber of people are attracted to 
purchase the products; (b) Surviving in a Competitive Market: If a firm is 
facing difficulties in surviving in the market because of intense competition or 
introduction of a more efficient substitute by a  competitor, it may resort to 
discounting its products or running a promotion campaign to liquidate its 
stock; and (c) Attaining Product Quality Leadership: In this case, normally 
higher prices are charged to cover high quality and high cost of research and 
Development. 
6. Marketing Methods Used: Price fixation process is also affected by other 
elements of marketing such as distribution system, quality of salesmen 
employed, quality and amount of advertising, sales promotion efforts, the 
type of packaging, product differentiation, credit facility a nd customer 
services provided. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       

--- END BusinessStudies-MS-2024-25.pdf ---
--- START BusinessStudies-SQP-2023-24.pdf ---
  
 
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER 2023-24 
BUSINESS STUDIES (054) 
CLASS XII 
  Max Marks – 80                                                           Time allowed: 3 Hours             
 
 General instructions: 
1. This question paper contains 34 questions. 
2. Marks are indicated against each question. 
3. Answers should be brief and to the point. 
4. Answers to the questions carrying 3 marks may be from 50 to 75 words. 
5. Answers to the questions carrying 4 marks may be about 150 words. 
6. Answers to the questions carrying 6 marks may be about 200 words. 
7. Attempt all parts of the questions together. 
 
1. 
The Board of directors of Medex Pharma Ltd. decided to issue debentures 
worth ₹40 lakhs in order to finance a major Research and Development 
project. This would increase the Debt Equity ratio from 1:1 to 2:1.However, at 
the same time it would increase the Earnings per share. 
 The reason that will justify the above situation is: 
a) Unfavourable financial leverage, as the financial risk will be higher. 
b) Unfavourable financial leverage, as return on investment is lower than the 
cost of debt. 
c) Favourable financial leverage as debt is easily available 
d) Favourable financial leverage, as return on investment is higher than cost 
of debt  
1 
2.  A bottle of Anti- dandruff shampoo mentions ' Clean your hair and get rid of 
dandruff in one squeeze'. The product related decision involved is-  
a) Branding          b) Product quality  
c) Packaging        d) Labelling 
1 
3. With the presence of women in the workforce, there has been a shift towards 
formal wear, increased demand of electronic gadgets and increase in demand 
of cosmetics. 
The related dimension of business environment referred in the above lines is: 
a) Technological environment.       b) Social environment 
c) Political environment.                  d) Economic environment  
1 
4. 
Name the function of marketing which is effective in bringing repeat sales 
from the customers and developing brand loyalty for a product. 
a) Standardization and grading  
b)  Promotion 
c) Customer support services   
d)  Packaging and labelling  
1 
   5. SEBI calls for information and issues a show cause notice to stock exchange 
and its officials seeking explanation and conducting audit and enquiry. Which 
function is SEBI performing? 
a) Regulatory function          b) Development function 
      c) Protective function             d) Both a) and c) 
 
 
1 
6. 
  
Identify the point of significance of management illustrated in the picture. 
a) Management helps in achieving group goals 
b) Management helps in achieving personal objectives 
c) Management helps in development of society 
d) Management increases efficiency 
1 
7. The allocative function of Financial market helps in ________ 
a) Bringing transparency in trading procedure 
b) Earning higher rate of return to household sector 
c) Better functioning of depository 
d) Determining the prices of securities  
1 
8. IND Dyechem Ltd. is a chemical manufacturing company producing dyes and 
pigments both for domestic and international market. It has enjoyed a 
considerable market share but lately, it has been facing problems in terms of 
target sales and customer satisfaction. This is due to the reason that new 
entrants have emerged with better technology and competitive pricing. The 
Chairman of the company addressed this issue in the departmental meeting. 
The production head, Mr. Kamble, advised the Chairman to revamp the 
system and take immediate necessary actions to rectify the problem so that 
1 

sales are achieved as per the plans. 
Identify the relevant function of management being discussed here. 
a) Organising     b) Staffing 
b) Controlling      d) Planning  
9. Choose the incorrect statement about pricing objectives as a factor affecting 
the price of a product. 
a) If a firm's objective is to maximize profits in the short run, it should charge 
maximum price for its products. 
b) If a firm's objective is to capture market share, it should keep low price of its 
product. 
c) If a firm wants to attain product quality leadership, it should charge lower 
prices. 
d) If a firm is facing problems in survival due to stiff competition, it may offer 
discount on its products. 
1 
10. Read the following statements: Assertion (A) and Reason(R). Choose the 
correct alternative from those given below: 
ASSERTION (A): Management is concerned with efficient use of resources. 
REASONING (R): For management both efficiency and effectiveness need to 
be balanced. 
Alternatives: 
a) Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true and Reason (R) is the correct 
explanation of Assertion (A). 
 b) Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true and Reason (R) is not the 
correct explanation of Assertion (A) 
 c) Assertion (A) is true but Reason (R) is False 
 d) Assertion (A) is False but Reason (R) is True 
1 
11. Concentration of decision making functions at the apex of management 
hierarchy is called __________ 
a) Decentralisation.                  b) Delegation 
       c) Organisational structure.      d) Centralisation 
1 
12. Some employees have been assigned the job of measuring the output in an 
objective and reliable way. They are applying different techniques for 
achieving this aim. Some of these are personal-observation, sample-checking 
etc. They are also keeping the units of measurement same as that of the units 
in the standards. 
 Name the step of ‘Controlling process applicable in the above paragraph.  
 a) Analysing deviations 
b) Comparing actual performance with standards. 
 c) Establishing standards.  
d) Measurement of actual performance 
1 
13. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Statement I: For products requiring long term storage like agricultural 
products, the warehouses are located near to the market. 
Statement II: Higher the level of inventory, higher will be the level of service to 
customers but the cost of carrying the inventory will also be high. 
Choose the correct option from the following: 
a) Statement I is true and II is false 
b) Statement II is true and I is false 
c) Both the statements are true 
d) Both the statements are false 
1 
14. Mr. Vivek is working as the General Manager of Oshin Hotels Ltd.  Mr. Vivek 
observed that Government was taking a special interest in the Tourism 
industry as this sector is an important source of foreign exchange and 
employment promotion. On the basis of this news, the company decided to 
set up hotels at several tourist places. Oshin Hotels Ltd. established 50 hotels 
before other companies considered this issue. Very soon, this brand Oshin 
Hotels Ltd. became well known in the market. Identify the importance of 
business environment described here.  
a) It enables the firm to identify opportunities and getting the first mover 
advantage.  
b) It helps the firm to identify threats and early warning signals.  
c) It helps in tapping useful resources.  
d) It helps in improving performance. 
1 
15. Name the function of management that acts as a means for translating plans 
into action. 
     a)  Planning                  b) Directing 
     c)  Organising               d) Controlling 
1 
16. 
STATEMENT I: Electronic holdings can be converted into physical certificates 
with the process of dematerialisation. 
STATEMENT II: There is no danger of theft, loss or forgery of share 
certificates in dematerialisation. 
Choose the correct option from the following: 
 
      a) Statement I is true and II is false 
b) Statement II is true and I is false 
      c) Both the statements are true 
      d) Both the statements are false  
 
1 
17. ‘Pace.’ is a reputed Chartered Accountant firm which renders services to big 
MNC’s. The Chartered Accountants of the firm are required to travel to Delhi 
and NCR for which they use company’s cars. The firm decided to convert its 
Petrol cars to Electric cars in order to improve the quality of life of people. 
Identify the dimensions of business environment.  
a) Political and Legal environment  
b) Legal and Social environment  
c) Technological and Political environment 
d) Social and Technological Environment 
1 
18. Match the following tools of promotion with their explanation and 
choose the correct option 
A. It is undertaken by some identified 
person /company who makes efforts 
and bears the cost of it. 
1 Personal selling 
B. It plays an important role at the 
awareness stage and develops 
product preferences with the aim of 
making sale. 
2 Sales Promotion 
C. It helps in managing public opinion 
and company’s relation with the public 
on regular basis. 
3 Advertising 
D. It uses tools specifically designed to 
promote to customers, middlemen and 
to salespersons. 
4 Public Relations 
 
a) A (3), B (1), C (4), D (2) 
b) A (1), B (3), C (4), D (2) 
c) A (2), B (3), C (4), D(1) 
d) A (2), B (4), C (1), D (3) 
1 
19. 
From the following which is not a relevant feature of management as science: 
a) Principles are based on the basis of experimentation 
b) Systematized body of knowledge 
c) Based on practice and creativity 
d) Universal Validity 
1 
20. 
The aim of demonetisation was not to____________ 
a) Curb corruption 
b) Reduce the prices of real estate 
c) Withhold the accumulation of black money generated by undeclared 
income 
d) Counterfeit the use of high denomination notes for illegal activities 
1 
21.  Captcha Ltd. is a construction company in which all the employees learn 
various ways of dealing with diverse situations from their seniors. Company 
provides financial as well as non-financial incentives. This helps the 
employees to grow and develop their abilities. The organisation behaves as a 
responsible constituent of society and always creates good quality products. It 
has a positive image in the market. The training modules are excellent and 
the employees always try to find unique ways of providing solutions in the 
context of rapidly changing business environment. This has helped the 
organisation to adjust smoothly. 
Identify and state three points of importance of management being highlighted 
here. 
3 
22. State any three reasons as to why controlling is regarded as an indispensable 
function of management. 
OR 
Enumerate any three advantages of Management by Exception which is used 
by manager in analysing deviations. 
3 
 
 
 
 
3 
23. Resolutions Pvt. Ltd. is a publishing company. Its book on Business Studies 
for class XII is in great demand. As a result, the employees in the marketing 
department are always racing against time as they have to work overtime and 
on holidays as well to cater to the demand. The work stress has led to 
dissatisfaction among the employees of the marketing department. 
1. Name and explain the step of staffing process which has not been 
performed properly. 
2. Also, explain the immediate next step in the process of staffing. 
3 
24. State any three functions of Stock Exchange. 
OR 
State the first three steps involved in the screen-based trading for buying and 
selling of securities. 
3 
 
3 
25. Explain the following features of Directing 
a) Directing initiates action 
b) Directing is a continuous process 
 
OR 
Explain the following leadership styles: 
a) Autocratic leadership 
b) Laissez Faire leadership  
4 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
26. 
State any four limitations of using internal sources of recruitment. 
OR 
State any four commonly used sources of recruiting employees from outside 
the organisation.  
4 
 
4 
27 Mr. Akshay, a 20 year old college student purchased a book online from XYZ 
Pvt Ltd and when it was delivered, he noticed that there was no MRP 
mentioned on it. He browsed the internet and found that the book was sold at 
different prices in different places. He filed a case in District forum against the 
publisher. The court held in favour of Akshay and awarded a compensation of 
₹10,000. 
a)Identify and state the consumer right violated in the above case. 
b) Name and explain the right exercised by Mr. Akshay.  
4 
28. Explain the following factors affecting the dividend decision of the company: 
a) Taxation Policy 
b) Cash Flow Position 
4 
29. Identify and state the various elements of communication highlighted in the 
following cases: 
(i) Department 'A' has sent an encoded message to department 'B' through 
internet. What is the role of internet here? 
(ii) Madhur is making gestures so that he can send a message to Ranbhir. 
What is Madhur doing here? 
(iii) Ranbhir is trying to understand the message sent by Madhur by reading 
his gestures. What is Ranbhir doing here? 
(iv) Kamesh picks up his phone and finds a message on it. He reads the 
message carefully. What is the role of Kamesh here? 
4 
30. Dhaval Acharya, after acquiring a bachelor’s degree in Hotel Management 
joined his father’s chain of vegetarian restaurants in Ahmednagar. Being 
young and enterprising, he suggested his father to add a new section of 
vegetarian bakery items which required an investment of ₹ 5 crores. His father 
Mr. Aariketh Acharya suggested him to take the decision with caution and 
understood everything comprehensively as bad decision may damage the 
financial fortune of business. 
Identify the decision suggested by Mr. Aariketh Acharya. State by giving any 
three reasons as to why he must have advised his son to take decision with 
caution.  
4 
31. 
1) Explain any two techniques of Scientific Management from the following: 
a) Method study 
b) Motion study 
c) Time study 
 
2) Differentiate between Unity of Command and Unity of Direction on any 
three basis. 
OR 
1) Explain any two principles of Fayol from the following: 
a) Discipline 
b) Order 
c) Initiative  
 
2) Differentiate between contributions made by F.W.Taylor and Henry Fayol 
on any three basis. 
 
3+3=6 
 
 
 
3+3=6 
 
32. Explain the steps that are required to be performed by a manager before 
evaluating all possible courses of action in planning process. 
                                OR 
Explain how planning: 
a) Reduces overlapping and wasteful activities 
b) Establishes standards for controlling 
c) Facilitates decision making 
6 
 
 
 
6 
33. Read the statements given in point 1 and 2, answer the questions that follow: 
1) Tea is produced in Assam but is carried to customers not only in this 
state but also in other parts of the country. 
a) Identify and explain the function of marketing that enables the marketer to 
achieve its goals.  
b) Enumerate any two factors that marketer should take into consideration in 
order to analyse the identified needs. 
 2) Paddy is grown during summer season but its demand and sale takes 
place throughout the year. 
a) Name and state the function of marketing which should be undertaken to 
reduce the gap between production and consumption of Paddy. 
b) State by giving two reasons as to why proper discharge of this function is 
important. 
 
3+3=6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34. Diligent developers, a website design company in Bangalore is a startup 
initiative of Mr. Maniraj which aims at achieving a profit margin of 10% in its 
first year. Mr. Maniraj appointed Mr. Advait as the Digital marketing Head, Mr. 
Kiyansh as the head of Backend department and Mr. Nirved headed the 
Graphics Designing Department. Since each head was specialised in specific 
skills, it resulted in increased efficiency and better coordination. 
 However, problems arose when Mr. Advait started considering group 
objectives superior to organisational objectives and stopped exchanging 
information with Mr. Kiyansh and Mr. Nirved. The company had to bear the 
brunt of lack of coordination and was unable to achieve its objectives. 
a) Identify and state the organisational structure adopted by the company. 
b) State two benefits and two limitations of the identified structure highlighted 
in the above case. 
6 
 

--- END BusinessStudies-SQP-2023-24.pdf ---
--- START BusinessStudies-MS-2023-24.pdf ---
MARKING SCHEME 
BUSINESS STUDIES (054) 
Class XII (2023-24) 
  
 Answers: 
Marks 
1 
d) Favourable financial leverage as return on investment is higher than 
cost of debt 1 
2 d) Labelling 1 
3 b) Social environment 1 
4 
c) Customer support services  
1 
5 
a) Regulatory function  
1 
6 a) Management helps in achieving group goals 
 
1 
7 
b) Earning higher rate of return to household sector  
1 
8 c) Controlling 1 
9 c) If firm wants to attain product quality leadership, it should charge 
lower prices  
1 
10 b) Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true and Reason (R) is not 
the correct explanation of Assertion (A). 
1 
11 d) Centralisation  1 
12 
d) Measurement of actual performance 
1 
13 b) Statement II is true and I is false 1  
14 a) It enables the firm to identify opportunities and getting the first 
mover advantage.  
 
1 
15 
c) Organising  
1 
16 b) Statement II is true and I is false 
 
1 
17 d) Social and Technological Environment 1 
18 
a) A (3), B (1), C (4), D (2) 
1 
19 
c) Based on practice and creativity 
1 
20 
b) Reduce the prices of real estate 
1 
21 The importance of management highlighted: 
1. Helps in achieving personal objectives– A manager 
motivates and leads his team in such a manner that 
individual members are able to achieve personal goals 
while contributing to the overall organizational goals. 
2. Helps in the development of society- The organisation tries 
to behave as responsible constituent of society and always 
creates good quality products. 
3.Creates a dynamic organisation- Organisations have to 
function in a constantly changing environment. 
Management helps people adapt to the changes so that 
organisation is able to maintain a competitive edge. 
1/2mark each 
for 
identification 
and 1/2 mark 
each for 
stating 3 
identified 
points 
22 Importance of controlling: (Any Three) 
1. The controlling function measures progress towards the 
organisational goals and brings to light the deviations, if 
any, and indicates corrective action. 
2. A good control system enables management to verify 
whether the standards set are accurate and objective. 
3. By exercising control, a manager seeks to reduce wastage 
and spoilage of resources. Each activity is performed in 
accordance with predetermined standards and norms. 
4. A good control system ensures that employees know well in 
advance what they are expected to do and what are the 
standards of performance on the basis of which they are 
appraised. 
5. Controlling creates an atmosphere of order and discipline in 
the organisation. 
6. Controlling provides direction to all activities and efforts for 
achieving organizational goals. 
 
OR 
  
 
1 mark each 
for stating 
any 3 points 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADVANTAGES OF MANAGEMENT BY EXCEPTION: 
1) It saves the time and efforts of managers as they deal with only 
significant deviations 
2) It focuses managerial attention on important areas. There is 
better utilization of managerial talent. 
3) The routine problems are left to the subordinates. Thus, it 
facilitates delegation of authority and increases morale of 
employees. 
4) It identifies critical problems which need timely action to keep 
the organisation in right direction. 
 
 
1 mark each 
for stating 
any 3 points 
23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The step of staffing process which has not been performed 
properly is: 
(i)Estimation of manpower requirements: Operationally, understanding 
the manpower requirements would necessitate workload analysis on 
the one hand and workforce analysis on the other. 
(ii)The next stage immediately following the step Estimation of 
manpower requirement is as follows: 
Recruitment: Recruitment may be defined as the process of searching 
for prospective employees and stimulating them to apply for jobs in the 
organisation. 
 
1 mark for 
identification 
and I mark 
for 
explanation 
   + 
1 mark for 
explaining 
next step 
 
24 Functions of Stock Exchange 
1. Stock exchange provides liquidity and marketability to existing 
securities by creating a continuous market where securities are 
bought and sold. It gives them the chance to invest and 
disinvest 
2.  A stock exchange is a mechanism of constant valuation 
through which the prices of securities are determined by the 
market forces of demand and supply. 
3. The membership of a stock exchange is well regulated and 
well defined according to the existing legal framework, thereby 
ensuring a safe and fair deal to investors in the market. 
4. Through the process of disinvestment and reinvestment 
savings get channelised into the most productive investment 
avenues leading to capital formation and economic growth. 
5.  Stock exchange ensures wider share ownership by regulating 
new issues, better trading practices and taking effective steps 
in educating the public about investment. 
6. Stock exchange provides sufficient scope for speculative 
activity in restricted and controlled manner. 
                   OR 
The first 3 steps in screen-based trading in securities 
1. Investor has to first approach a registered broker and enter                 
into agreement. He has to open a broker- client agreement and 
a client registration form before placing the order. He has to 
provide few details like PAN number, date of birth and address, 
educational qualification and occupation, Residential 
status,Bank account details, Depository account details,name 
of any other broker with whom registered, client code number 
in the client registration form. The broker opens a trading 
account in the name of investor. 
2. The investor has to open a demat account or beneficial owner 
account with a depository participant for holding and 
transferring securities in the demat form. 
3. The investor places an order with the broker to buy or sell 
shares. Clear instructions have to be given about the number 
of shares and price at which shares can be bought or sold. The 
broker will go ahead with the deal to mention the best price 
available. Order confirmation slip is issued to the investor by 
the broker. 
                     
      
 1 mark each 
for stating 
any 3 points 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OR 
 
 
1 mark each 
for stating 
each step 
 
 
25 a) Directinginitiates action-Directing is a key managerial function. A 
manager has to perform this function along with planning, 
organizing, staffing and controlling while discharging his duties in the 
organization. 
b) Directing is a continuous activity- It takes place throughout the life 
of organization irrespective of people occupying managerial 
positions.  
OR 
a) Autocraticor Authoritarian leadership style-An autocratic leader 
gives orders and expects his subordinates to obey those orders. This 
leadership style is effective in getting productivity in many situations 
like in a factory where the supervisor is responsible for production 
on time and has to ensure labour productivity. Quick decision-
making is also facilitated. 
b) Laissez fair or Free-rein leader-Such a leader does not believe in the 
use of power unless it is absolutely essential.The followers are given 
high degree of independence to formulate their own objectives or 
ways to achieve them. The manager is only there to support them 
and supply them the required information to complete the task 
assigned. 
 
 
 
 
2 marks each 
for explaining 
points. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 marks each 
for explaining 
leadership 
styles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
Limitations of using internal sources of recruitment are as follows:  
1. When vacancies are filled through internal promotions, the 
scope for induction of fresh talent is reduced. Hence, complete 
reliance on internal recruitment involves danger of ‘inbreeding’ 
by stopping ‘infusion of new blood’ into the organization. 
2. The employees may become lethargic if they are sure of time 
bound promotions; 
3. A new enterprise cannot use internal sources of recruitment. 
No organisation can fill all its vacancies from internal sources;  
4. The spirit of competition among the employees may be 
hampered; and 
5. Frequent transfers of employees may often reduce the 
productivity of the organisation. 
OR                                             OR 
Commonly used sources of recruiting the employees from outside the 
organization (any 4) 
Direct recruitment- A notice is placed on the notice board of the 
enterprise specifying the details of the jobs available. Job-seekers 
assemble outside the premises of the organisation on the specified 
date and selection is done on the spot. It is suitable for filling casual 
vacancies  when there is a rush of work or when some permanent 
workers are absent.  
Casual Callers - Many reputed business organizations keep a 
database of unsolicited applicants in their offices. A list of such job-
seekers can be prepared and can be screened to fill the vacancies 
as they arise. Most of the senior positions of industry as well as 
commerce are filled by this method. The advantage of advertising 
vacancies is that more information about the organization and job 
can be given in the advertisement.              . 
Employment exchange- Employment exchange run by a government 
are a good source of recruitment for unskilled and skilled operative 
jobs. They help to match personnel demand and supply by serving 
as a link between job-seekers and employers.                                                                                        
Placement Agencies and management consultants- Placement 
agencies provide a nationwide service in matching personnel 
demand and supply. Management consultancy firms help the 
organization to recruit technical, professional and managerial 
personnel. 
 Campus recruitment-Many big organisations maintain a close 
liaison with the universities, vocational schools and management 
institutes to recruit qualified personnel for various jobs. 
Recommendation of employees – Applicants introduced by present 
employees, or their friends and relatives may prove to be a good 
source of recruitment. Such applicants are likely to be good 
1 mark each 
for stating 
any 4 
limitations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 mark each 
for stating 
any 4 
external 
sources 
employees because their background is sufficiently known. 
Labour Contractors – Labour contractors maintain close contacts 
with labourers and they can provide the required number of unskilled 
workers at short notice. 
 Advertising on Television- The detailed requirements of the job and 
the qualities required to do it are publicized along with the profile of 
the organization where vacancy exist . 
Web publishing- Internet is becoming a common source of 
recruitment these days. There are certain websites specifically 
designed and dedicated for the purpose of providing information 
about both job-seekers and job opening. 
 
27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a) Right to be informed :Every consumer has a right to have complete 
information about the product he intends to buy including its 
ingredients, date of manufacture, price, quantity, directions for use 
etc. 
b) Right to seek redressal: This states that every consumer has the 
right to get relief in case the product or service falls short of 
expectations. 
 1 mark each 
for 
identification  
+ 
1 mark each 
for 
explanation  
 
 
 
 
 
28 
Taxation policy: If tax on dividend is higher, it is better to pay less by 
way of dividends. Though dividends are free of tax in the hands of 
shareholders, a dividend distribution tax is levied on companies. Under 
the present tax policy, shareholders are likely to prefer higher 
dividends. 
Cash flow position: The payment of dividend involves an outflow of 
cash. Availability of enough cash in the company is necessary for 
declaration of dividend.  
2 marks each 
for explaining 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29  1. Media- It is the path through which encoded message is 
transmitted to receiver. The channel maybe in the written form, face to 
face, phone call, internet. 
2.  Encoding- It is a process of converting the message into 
communication symbols like words, pictures, gestures etc. 
3.  Decoding- It is a process of converting encoded symbols of the 
sender. 
4.Receiver- The person who receives communication of the sender. 
 
  
½ mark each 
for 
identification 
and ½ mark 
for stating 
 
  
30 Mr Aariketh Acharya has suggested capital budgeting decision.  
Reasons why he must have advised this decision are: 
1. These decisions have bearing on the long-term growth. They 
affect the future prospects of the business. 
2. These decisions result in large portion of funds being blocked 
in long term projects, these investments are planned after a 
detailed analysis. 
3. These decisions affect the returns of the firm, therefore 
influence the overall business risk complexion of the firm. 
4. These decisions once taken, are not reversible without 
incurring heavy losses. Abandoning a project after heavy 
investment is costly in terms of waste of funds. 
 1 mark for 
identification 
+ 
1 mark each 
for stating 
any 3 points 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
 
a) Method Study: The objective of method study is to find out one 
best way of doing the job. There are various methods of doing 
the job. To determine the best way there are several 
parameters. Right from procurement of raw materials till the 
final product is delivered to the customer every activity is part 
of method study. The objective of the whole exercise is to 
minimise the cost of production and maximise the quality and 
satisfaction of the customer. For this purpose, many 
techniques like process charts and operations research etc., 
are used. 
b) Motion Study: Motion study refers to the study of movements 
like lifting, putting objects, sitting and changing positions etc., 
which are undertaken while doing a typical job. Unnecessary 
movements are sought to be eliminated so that it takes less 
time to complete the job efficiently. On close examination of 
body motions, for example, it is possible to find out: (i) Motions 
which are productive (ii) Motions which are incidental (e.g., 
going to stores) (iii) Motions which are unproductive.  
c) Time Study: It determines the standard time taken to perform a 
well-defined job. Time measuring devices are used for each 
element of task. The standard time is fixed for the whole of the 
task by taking several readings. The method of time study will 
depend upon volume and frequency of the task, the cycle time 
of the operation and time measurement costs. The objective of 
time study is to determine the number of workers to be 
employed; frame suitable incentive schemes and determine 
labour costs. 
b) 
BASIS UNITY OF 
COMMAND 
UNITY OF 
DIRECTION 
1.Meaning One subordinate 
should receive orders 
from and should be 
responsible to only 
one superior. 
Each group of 
activities having same 
objective must have 
one head and one plan 
2.Aim It prevents dual 
subordination. 
It prevents 
overlapping of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11/2 marks 
each for 
explaining 
any 2 
techniques 
   + 
1 mark each 
for any 3 
differences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activities 
3.Implications It affects an 
individual employee  
 
It affects the entire 
organisation. 
 
                                              OR 
a. Discipline: Discipline is the obedience to organisational rules 
and employment agreement which are necessary for the 
working of the organisation. According to Fayol, discipline 
requires good superiors at all levels, clear and fair agreements 
and judicious application of penalties. 
b. Order: According to Fayol, “People and materials must be in 
suitable places at appropriate time for maximum efficiency.” 
The principle of order states that ‘A place for everything 
(everyone) and everything (everyone) in its (her/his) place’.If 
there is a fixed place for everything and it is present there, then 
there will be no hindrance in the activities of business/ factory. 
This will lead to increased productivity and efficiency. 
c. Initative: Workers should be encouraged to develop and carry 
out their plans for improvements according to Fayol. Initiative 
means taking the first step with self-motivation. It is thinking out 
and executing the plan. Initiative should be encouraged. But it 
does not mean going against the established practices of the 
company for the sake of being different. A good company 
should have an employee suggestion system whereby 
initiative/ suggestions which result in substantial cost/time 
reduction should be rewarded. 
II. 
Basis of Difference  Henri Fayol F.W Taylor 
Perspective Top level of 
Management 
Shop floor level of 
a factory. 
Unity of Command Staunch Proponent Did not feel that it 
is important as 
under functional 
foremanship a 
worker receives 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11/2 marks 
each for 
explaining 
any 2 
principles 
    + 
1 mark each 
for any 3 
differences   
 
orders from eight 
specialists  
Applicability Applicable 
Universally 
Applicable to 
specialized 
situations  
Basis of Formation Personal Experience Observation and 
Experimentation 
Focus Improving Overall 
administration 
Increasing 
Productivity 
Personality Practitioner Scientist  
Expression General theory of 
Administration  
Scientific 
Management 
 
32 Steps in planning process 
1. Setting objectives: Objectives or goals specify what the 
organisation wants to achieve. They give direction to all 
departments and must be stated clearly. They may be set for 
the entire organisation and each department within the 
organisation 
2. Developing premises: Planning is concerned with future which 
is uncertain, therefore manager has to make certain 
assumptions about future. Assumptions are base material upon 
which plans are drawn which may be in the form of forecasts, 
existing plans or past information about policies. 
3. Identifying alternative courses of action: Once objectives are 
set and assumptions are made, next step is to identify 
alternative courses of action. The course of action may be 
routine or innovative. An innovative course may be adopted by 
involving more people and sharing their ideas. 
                        OR 
1) Planning reduces overlapping and wasteful activities 
Planning serves as a basis of coordinating the activities and efforts of 
different divisions, departments and sections. Since planning ensures 
clarity in thought and action, work is carried out smoothly without 
interruptions. 
 2) Planning establishes standards of controlling 
Planning provides the goals against which actual performance is 
measured. Through comparison, managers can know whether they 
are actually able to achieve the goals. Deviations, if any can be 
corrected. Thus planning is a prerequisite for controlling. The nature 
of deviations depends upon the extent of deviations from the 
standard.  
3) Planning facilitates decision making 
Planning helps managers to look into the future and make a choice 
from amongst various alternative courses of action. The manager has 
to evaluate each alternate and select the most viable proposition.  
 
 
 
 
  
 2 marks 
each for 
explaining 
first 3 steps 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 marks each 
for explaining 
3 points 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
a) The function of marketing that enables the marketer to achieve 
its goals is Transportation. 
It involves physical movement of goods from one place to another. 
Since the user of products are wide spread and geographically 
separated from the place where they are produced it is necessary to 
move them to the place where they are needed for consumption. 
b)The factors that should be taken into consideration to analyse the 
marketing needs are nature of the product, cost and location of target 
market. 
c) The function of marketing that reduces the gap between production 
and consumption of paddy is Storage or Warehousing. 
Due to irregular demand or supply, there may be time gap between 
production of goods and their sale. Storage helps in reducing the time 
gap between production and consumption and provides time utility. 
Importance of warehousing: 
1. To ensure smooth flow of products in the market 
2. To protect against any unavoidable delays in delivery or meet 
contingencies in demand.  
 
a)1 mark for 
identification 
+ 
1 mark for 
stating 
b)½ mark 
each for 
enumerating 
any 2 points 
c)1 mark for 
identification
+ 1 mark for 
stating + 1/2 
mark each 
for stating 
any 2points  
  
34 
a) The organisational structure adopted by Diligent Developers is 
Functional structure . Functional structure is an organisational design 
that groups similar or related jobs together. 
b) Benefits of functional structure: 
1) It leads to occupational specialization since emphasis is placed on 
specific functions.This promotes efficiency in utilization of manpower 
as employees perform similar tasks within a department and are able 
to improve performance. 
2) It promotes control and coordination within a department because of 
similarity in the tasks being performed. 
Limitations of functional structure: 
(a) A functional structure places less emphasis on overall enterprise 
objectives than the objectives pursued by a functional head. Such 
practices may lead to functional empires wherein the importance of a 
particular function may be overemphasised. Pursuing departmental 
interests at the cost of organisational interests can also hinder the 
interaction between two or more departments.  
(b) It may lead to problems in coordination as information has to be 
exchanged across functionally differentiated departments 
a. 1 
mark for 
identification
+ 1 mark for 
stating 
 
 
b 2 marks 
each for 
stating 2 
points of 
benefits and 
limitations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- END BusinessStudies-MS-2023-24.pdf ---
--- START BusinessStudies-SQP-2022-23.pdf ---
        
 
CLASS XII 
BUSINESS STUDIES 
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER 2022-23 
  MM – 80                                                                                                        TIME: 3 HOURS 
    
        
 
General instructions   : 
1 This question paper contains 34 questions. 
2. Marks are indicated against each question. 
3. Answers should be brief and to the point. 
4. Answers to the questions carrying 3 marks may be from 50 to 75 words. 
5. Answers to the questions carrying 4 marks may be about 150 words. 
6. Answers to the questions carrying 6 marks may be about 200 words. 
7. Attempt all parts of the questions together. 
 
1. 
 
Rishabh joined an  entertainment company Avtaar, as a creative he ad.  As a manager 
looking after the creative unit of the company, one of the functions he has to perform is 
the process of organizing. Which step of the process will he need to perform after 
identifying and dividing the work that has to be done in accordan ce with previously 
determined plans?  
 a)Identification and division of work 
 b).Departmentalisation 
 c).Assignment of Duties  
 d).Establishing Reporting Relationships 
1  
2.  
Which characteristic of the business environment is highlighted when changes are taking 
place too frequently and it becomes difficult to predict the future?   
a). Uncertainty          
b). Complexity 
c). Inter-relatedness  
d). Relativity 
 1 
3.  
 
Aarohan Ltd. is a company manufacturing automobiles where division of work into key 
areas includes production, purchase, marketing, accounts and personnel. Which of the 
following is a disadvantage of the organization structure of Aarohan Ltd.? 
a). It may lead to increase in cost 
b). Managers may gain power and assert independence and ignore organization interests. 
c). It ensures that different functions get due attention. 
d). Heads do not get training for top management positions. 
 1 
4. 
 
Identify the dimensions of the business environment illustrated by the picture given above 
in which Sapna who has joined the workforce recently is working on an accounting 
software. 
a. Technological and social. 
b. Technological and political  
c. Political and economic  
d. Social and legal 
 1 
 5. 
 
Identify the reason which  makes management important in the light of the fact that it is 
generally seen that individuals in an organization resist change,  as a change often means 
moving from a familiar, secure environment into a newer and a more challenging one. 
a. Management helps in achieving group goals.  
b. Management creates a dynamic organization 
c. Management increases efficiency 
d. Management helps in the development of society. 
 1 
 
 
6.  The government of India made an announcement regarding Demonetization of the Indian 
economy on November 8, 2016 with profound implications for it. The process which 
put restrictions on convertibility of domestic money and bank deposits was meant to 
create a less-cash economy. One argument against the cash-lite economy is that: 
a).Internet connectivity is a prerequisite 
b).More people will be introduced into the formal economy. 
c).Financial saving will increase 
d).Tax evasion will be reduced          
 1 
7. 
 
Airlines will be able to offer the benefit of lower pricing to customers on 
sectors/routes  due to the decision of the civil aviation ministry to remove price caps   from 
August 31, 2022.   This can help an airline to do better performance if they take earl y 
decisions regarding future courses of action after understanding and doing analysis.  Which 
importance of business environment and its understanding by managers is not   highlighted 
above: 
 
a. It helps in improving performance  
b. It helps in assisting in planning and policy formulation 
c. It helps in tapping useful resources 
d. It enables a firm to identify opportunities and get first mover advantage. 
 1 
8. 
 
 Alo a mobility platform is in the process of laying off 400 -500 employees in a  move aimed 
at driving cost efficiency. Which objective of management will the firm not be able to 
achieve by carrying out this process. 
a) Efficiency                               
b)  Social  
 c) Profit                                           
d)  Survival 
 1 
9. 
 
Radha started a home cooked food delivery Dabba service. Her mother, who is a great 
cook, decided to help her. They relied on friends and family for orders and then on word of 
mouth. As a step in the process of  ensuring that activities  are performed as per her plan 
of supplying healthy, good quality, reasonable food and earning profit, she decided to keep 
both qualitative and quantitative benchmarks towards which she would strive to work. A  
function of management is being discussed abo ve. An important characteristic of this 
function of management is : 
a. It is the first function of management  
b. It is the Last function of management 
c. It is both forward looking and backward looking. 
d.  It is required only in business organizations. 
 1 
10. 
 
Raman and Vasudev were two employees who were embezzling an import -export 
company in Varanasi where they were working. The finance manager of the company 
Sampat Singh became suspicious of the two employees when he realized that their 
activities were not being performed as per the plans.  He installed a software program that 
could secretly log every single stroke of the suspects’ computer keys and send an 
encrypted email report to the Cyber police. The police were able to catch the two 
dishonest employees re d handed and arrest them. Identify the function of management 
being discussed above. 
a. Staffing 
b. Coordination 
c. Controlling 
d. Organizing 
1  
11.  
Name the outcome of the function of management which includes designing of roles to be 
filled by suitably skilled people and defining the inter relationship between roles so that 
ambiguity in performance of duties can be eliminated. 
a. Organization structure                    
 1 
 b. Delegation of authority  
c. Decentralization                              
d. controlling  
12. Statement-I Transportation helps in creating time utility and warehousing helps in creating 
place utility  
Statement-II The process of classification of products into different groups on the basis of 
their important characteristics is known as standardization. 
Choose the correct option from the options given below: 
a. Statement I is true and II is false 
b. Statement II is true and I is false  
c. Both the statements are true 
d. Both the statements are false  
 1 
13.  
 
Match the various terms of Financial Markets Column - I with their respective Statements 
in Column-II 
 Column - I  Column - II 
a Financial market i It is also known as the Stock market 
b Primary market ii It is a market for creation and exchange 
 of financial assets. 
c Secondary market iii It is also known as  New issue market 
(a)  (ii), (iii), (i)    (b) (i), (iii), (ii) 
(c) (iii), (ii), (i)    (d) (i), (ii), (iii) 
 
14. 
 
________________ is a number assigned to each transaction by the stock exchange  and is 
printed on the contract note. 
a. Client code number 
b. Unique order code  
c. Permanent account number 
d. Depository participant number 
 1 
15. 
 
One of the important decision areas under the marketing function of ……………………..   is 
managing inventory. 
a. Branding  
b. Pricing  
c. Promotion  
d. Physical distribution. 
 1 
16. 
 
Which of the following statements   is incorrect? 
a.  Providing liquidity to securities is one of the functions of stock exchange 
b. Process of holding shares in electronic form is known as Dematerialization 
c. Securities Exchange Board of India performs the regulatory function of controlling 
insider trading and imposing penalties for such practices. 
d. Capital market consists of Commercial banks, Development banks and stock 
 1 
exchanges  
17.  One of the following is considered to be an extension of the marketing concept, which 
apart from customer satisfaction pays attention to ethical and ecological aspects of 
marketing. Identify the concept. 
a. Selling concept 
b. Product concept  
c. Production concept 
d. Societal Marketing concept  
 
18. While the product costs set the lower limits of the price for a product, the upper limit of 
price which a buyer would be prepared to pay is decided by: 
a.  Utility and demand of the product 
b. The marketing manager of the firm 
c. The Government 
d. The competitors of the firm 
 
19.  Which of the following statements about Advertising  is incorrect? 
a. It is a personal form of communication  
b. It is a paid form of communication  
c. It is a mass selling technique.  
d. It is inflexible as the message can’t be adjusted to the needs of the buyer. 
 
20.  
Arrange the steps involved in trading procedure at the stock exchange in correct sequence 
: 
      i) Settlement of order 
    ii) Opening of Demat Account 
    iii) Placing of order 
    iv) Execution of order 
      a)  (ii) ; (iv);( iii);(i)   b)   (ii) ;(i) ;(iii);(ii) 
       c)   (iii);(ii);( ii);(i)                                    d)   (ii);(iii);(iv);(i)  
 
21.  
 
Top management plans for the entire organization. According to these plans the 
organizational structure is developed and staffed. In order to ensure that these plans are 
executed according to plans, directing is required. Any discrepancies between actual a nd 
realized activities are then taken care of at the stage of controlling. Name and explain the 
process highlighted above  which started at the planning stage itself and is implicit and 
inherent in all the functions of management in an organization. 
 3 
22. 
Mrs. Ahilya Pasi is the Principal of a prestigious school in New Delhi. The school has a 
vacancy of a headmistress/headmaster of the junior wing of the school.  The senior 
teachers of the school have the opinion that only internal candidates should be considered 
for this post. However, Mrs. Pasi and the management would like to invite applications 
from external sources too.  Briefly explain any three justifications the management can 
provide to convince the staff for inviting applications of external candidates for the vacant 
post.  
 3 
23. 
 
Explain “Critical point control” with respect to Analyzing deviations, a step in the process of 
controlling. Give a suitable example. 
OR 
Explain “Management by exception” with respect to Analyzing deviations, a step in the 
process of controlling. Give a suitable example. 
 3 
24.  State any three objectives of the Securities Exchange Board of India. 
Or 
State any three functions performed by the stock exchange. 
 3 
 
3 
25. 
 
Enumerate any four benefits of the process by which the aptitudes, skills and abilities of 
employees to perform specific jobs are increased. 
 
OR 
 
Name the mechanism that attempts to measure certain characteristics of individuals in the 
process of identifying and choosing the best person out of the number of prospective 
candidates for the job. Enumerate any three of its types. 
 4 
26. 
  
 
 State any four barriers to communication which are concerned with problems and 
obstructions in the process of encoding and decoding the message into words or 
impressions. 
OR 
State any four barriers to communication which are related to authority relationships, rules 
and regulations of the company. 
 4 
27 
 
In Saarthak Steel several initiatives have been taken to further improve the motivation 
levels of employees through designi ng jobs that include greater variety of work content, 
providing certain stability about future income and work, providing fringe benefits like 
housing, medical aid, etc., allotment of shares in line with various incentives. Identify and 
briefly explain the incentives being given by the organization to the employees.     
 4 
28. 
 State any four factors affecting the financial decision that is concerned with raising of 
finance using shareholders’ funds and borrowed funds.   4 
29. 
 
Krish limited is in the business of manufacturing and exporting carpets and other home 
décor products. It has a share capital of ₹ 70 lacs at the face value of ₹ 100 each. Company 
is considering a major expansion of its production facilities and wants to r aise  ₹ 50 lacs. 
The finance manager of the company Mr. Prabhakar  has recommended that the company 
can raise funds of the same amount by issuing 7% debentures. Given that earning per share 
of the company after expansion is ₹ 35 and tax rate is 30%, did Mr.  Prabhakar give a 
justified recommendation? 
Show the working.   
  
  
4 
30. 
 
Mayank purchased a pack of chocolates of a renowned brand for his daughter from a shop 
in the nearby market. After consuming the chocolates, his daughter fell sick. He filed a case 
with the District forum against the renowned brand. He lost the case becaus e of a mistake 
that he could not provide proof of purchase. What should be kept in mind by a consumer 
while purchasing, using and consuming goods and services apart from avoiding the mistake 
committed by Mayank,  in order to enable him/her to achieve the ob jective of consumer 
protection? Enumerate any four points. 
 4 
31. 
 
Briefly explain any three of the following techniques of Scientific Management as given by 
F.W. Taylor: 
a. Method study 
b. Functional foremanship 
c. Standardization 
d. Differential piece wage system 
 OR 
Briefly explain any three of the following principles of management given by Henry 
Fayol: 
a. Unity of command 
b. Equity  
c. Remuneration 
d. Initiative 
 6 
32. 
 
‘The pros and cons of each alternative  need to be weighed.’ Name and  briefly explain the 
logical steps in the process of planning which  are followed by a manager before 
performing the step highlighted in the above statement.  
OR 
Briefly explain the next three steps in the process of planning which the manager will have 
to have to follow after using conjecture about what might happen in the future. 
 6 
33. 
 
Jojo and Jojo is a company known for its consumer business of baby oil and bandages, but 
many people do not know that the company also runs a medical device and diagnostics 
business, as well as a pharmaceutical company. With more than 1,80,000 employees 
worldwide the company has chosen to share decision making authority with lower levels 
and place it nearest to the point of action. Therefore the response does not take time. This 
 6 
propagates the belief that people are competent, capable and resourceful who can get a 
chance to prove their abilities. And enables the company in identifying those executives 
who have the necessary potential to become dynamic leaders, so t hat the checking 
required on decisions taken by lower levels of management is the least. This makes it 
possible to evaluate performance at each level and each department can be individually 
held accountable for their results. 
By quoting the lines  given abo ve identify and briefly explain the benefits of the concept 
discussed above. 
34. Choco Ltd. offers a wide variety of chocolate products. It has an action program of not 
selling its products by their generic name but under different names like Choco -silk bar, 
Choco-Munchy and Choco -crunchy etc. for different customer segments. All these  names 
have great popularity and acceptability in the markets. 
As the company policy the products were offered at reasonable and affordable prices for 
targeting a mass customer base.  
During the festive season the company launched a massive promotional cam paign to 
increase its revenue and achieve its communication objectives. The company introduced 
free gifts for the customers.  
 Their on-ground sales team delivers the product not only to the departmental stores but 
also to small shops, so that all  segment s of customers can easily get the products.  They 
also provide  information and support services to customers to ensure repeat sales. 
From the viewpoint of the management function, briefly explain any four activities of 
marketing which the firm will be invo lved in, apart from the above -mentioned ones it's 
already performing. 
 6 
 
 

--- END BusinessStudies-SQP-2022-23.pdf ---
--- START BusinessStudies-MS-2022-23.pdf ---
       MARKING SCHEME 
BUSINESS  STUDIES 
2022-23 
  Answers 
Marks 
1 
 b) Departmentalization  
1 
2 
a) Uncertainty 
1 
3 
 d) Heads do not get training for top management   positions. 
1 
4 
a) Technological and Social 
1 
5 
b) Management creates a dynamic organization  
1 
6 a) Internet connectivity is a prerequisite 1 
7 
      c)  It helps in tapping useful resources 
1 
8 
       b)  Social 
1 
9 
c) It is both forward looking and backward looking 
1 
10 
c)   Controlling 
1 
11 
a) Organization structure  
1 
12 d) Both the statements are false 
 
1 
13 
(a)  (ii), (iii), (i) 
1 
14 
b) Unique order code 
1 
15 
d) physical distribution  
1 
16 
( C )Securities Exchange Board of India performs the regulatory function of 
controlling insider trading and imposing penalties for such practices. 1 
17 
d ).Societal Marketing concept  
1 
18 (a)  Utility and demand of the product 1 
19 
a) It is a personal form of communication  
1 
20 
d). (ii);(iii),(iv);(i) 
1 
21 
Coordination 
The process by which a manager synchronizes the activities of different 
departments is known as coordination. 
Coordination is the force that binds all the other functions of management. It 
is the common thread that runs through all activities. It is implicit and inherent 
in all functions of an organization. 
1 
(1X2) 
22 
Merits of external sources: (Any three) 
1. Qualified personnel: By using external sources of recruitment, the 
management can attract qualified and trained people to apply for 
vacant jobs in the organization. 
2. Wider choice: When vacancies are advertised wisely, a large number of 
applicants from outside the organization can apply. The management 
has a wider choice while selecting the people for employment. 
3. Fresh Talent: The present employees may be insufficient or they may 
not fulfill the specifications of the jobs to be filled. External 
recruitment provides wider choice and brings new blood in the 
organization. 
4. Competitive spirit: If a company taps external sources, the existing 
sources, the existing staff will have to compete with the outsiders. 
They will work harder to show better performance. 
  
(1X3=3) 
½ mark for the 
heading and ½ 
for the 
explanation  
 
 
 
23 
Critical point control: It is neither economical nor easy to keep a check on each 
and every activity in an organization. 
 Control should therefore focus on key result areas which are critical to the 
success of an organization.  
(2+1 = 3)  
 
These KRAs are set as the critical points. If anything goes wrong at the critical 
points, the entire organization suffers. 
 For instance, in a manufacturing organization, an increase of 5% in the labour 
cost may be more troublesome than a 15% increase in postal charges. 
OR 
 
Management by Exception: Management by exception, which is often referred 
to as control by exception, is an important principle of  management control 
based on the belief that an attempt to control everything results in controlling 
nothing.  
Thus, only significant deviations which go beyond the permissible limit should 
be brought to the notice of the management.  
For instance, if the plans lay down 2% increase in labour cost as an acceptable 
range of deviation in a manufacturing organization, only an increase in labour 
cost beyond 2% should be brought to the notice of the management. However, 
in case of major devia tion from the standard (say, 5%), the matter has to 
receive immediate action of management on a priority basis. 
 
 
 
 
 
(2+1=3) 
 
 
 
 
24 Following are the objectives of SEBI : ( any three)  
1. To regulate stock exchanges and the securities industry to promote 
their orderly functioning 
2. To protect the rights and interests of investors, particularly individual 
investors and to guide and educate them. 
3. To prevent trading malpractices and achieve a balance between self-
regulation by the securities industry and its statutory regulation. 
4. To regulate and develop a code of conduct and fair practices by 
intermediaries like brokers, merchant bankers etc., with a view to 
making them competitive and professional.                                             
 OR 
Following are the functions of stock exchange: (any three) 
(i) Providing liquidity and marketability to existing securities. 
(ii) Pricing of securities on the stock exchange is determined by the forces of 
demand and supply. 
(iii) Safety of transaction is ensured as membership of a stock exchange is well 
regulated and its dealings are well defined. 
(iv) Contributes to economic growth through the process of disinvestment and 
reinvestment. 
(v) Spreading of equity cult by ensuring wider ownership by way of regulating 
new issues. 
(vi) Providing scope for speculation by ensuring speculative activity within the 
                         
 (1x3) 
1 mark for each 
correct 
statement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1x3) 
1 mark for each 
correct 
statement. 
provisions of law for it to take place in a restricted and controlled manner. 
25 
The benefits of training to an organization are as follows:(any four) 
(i) Training is a systematic learning, 
Always better than hit and trial methods which lead to wastage of efforts and 
money? 
(ii) It enhances employee productivity both in terms of quantity and quality, 
leading to higher profits. 
(iii) Training equips the f uture manager who can take over in case of 
emergency. 
(iv)Training increases employee morale and reduces absenteeism and 
employee turnover. 
(v) It helps in obtaining an effective response to a fast changing environment – 
technological and economic. 
       OR 
 
 
Selection test 
 
Types of tests are: ( any three) 
a. Intelligence test is one of the important psychological tests used to 
measure the level of intelligence quotient of an individual and is an 
indicator of a person’s ability or the ability to make decisions and 
judgments. 
b. Aptitude test is a measure of an ind ividual's potential for learning new 
skills and indicates the person’s capacity to develop.  
c. Personality tests provide clues to a person’s emotions, her reactions, 
maturity, and value system and probe the overall personality. 
d. Trade tests  measure the existi ng skills of the individual, level of 
knowledge and proficiency in the area of professions or technical 
training. 
e. Interest tests are used to know the pattern of interests or involvement 
of a person. 
 
(1X4=4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1X3=3) 
26 
Semantic barriers (Any four): 
1. Sometimes intended meaning may not be conveyed by a manager to 
his subordinates due to badly expressed messages which may be on 
account of inadequate vocabulary, usage of wrong works, omission of 
needed works, etc. 
2. A word may have different meanings and the receiver has to perceive 
one such meaning for the word used by the communicator. 
3. If the translator is not proficient with both the languages, mistakes 
may creep in causing different meanings to communication. 
4. Some communications may have certain assumptions which are 
subject to different interpretations. 
5. It is usually found that specialists use technical jargon while explaining 
to persons who are not specialists in the concerned field and therefore 
they may not understand the actual meaning of many words. 
(1x4=4) 
1 mark for each 
correct 
statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. If there is no match between what is said and what is expressed in 
body movements, communications may be wrongly perceived. 
OR 
Organizational barriers (Any four): 
1. If organizational policy either explicit or implicit  is not supportive to 
free flow of communication it may hamper effectiveness of 
communications. 
2. Rigid rules and regulations, cumbersome procedures may be a hurdle 
to communication, as communications through prescribed channels 
may result in delays. 
3. Status of superior may create psychological distance between him and 
his subordinates.  
4. Complexity in the organization caused by the number of managerial 
levels may delay and distort the communication as the number of 
filtering points is more. 
5. If facilities like frequent meetings, suggestion box, and complaint box, 
social and cultural gathering, transparency in operations, etc, for 
smooth, clear and timely communications are not provided, 
communications may be hampered. 
           
 
 
 
 
(1X4=4) 
1 mark for each 
correct 
statement 
27  Incentives being given by the organization to the employees are: 
1. Job enrichment: Job enrichment is concerned with designing jobs that 
include greater variety of work content, require higher level of 
knowledge and skill; give workers more autonomy and responsibility; 
and provide opportunity for personal growth and a mean ingful work 
experience. 
2. Job security: Employees want their jobs to be secure. They want 
certain stability about future income and work so that they  do not feel 
worried about these aspects and work with greater zeal.  
3. Perquisites: In many companies perquis ites and fringe benefits are 
offered such as car allowance, housing, medical aid and education to 
the children, etc., over and above the salary. 
4. Co-partnership/stock option: Under these incentive schemes, 
employees are offered company shares at a set price which is lower 
than market price. Sometimes, management may allot shares in line of 
various incentives payable in cash. 
   
(1X4=4) 
½ mark for the 
heading and ½ 
mark for the 
explanation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 Following are the factors affecting capital structure  of a company : (Any 
four)                                                                                   
1. Size of the projected Cash flows must be considered before 
borrowing.  
2. Interest Coverage Ratio refers to the number of times earnings before 
interest and taxes of a company covers the interest obligation. 
3. Debt Service Coverage Ratio takes care of the defic iencies referred to 
(1X4=4) 
1 mark for each 
correct 
statement 
 
 
in the interest coverage ratio.  
4. More debt can be used if debt can be raised at a lower rate 
5. A higher Tax Rate makes debt relatively cheaper and increases its 
attraction vis-a-vis equity. 
6. Process of raising resources also involves some cost which may affect 
the choice between debt and equity and hence capital structure. 
7. If a firm’s business risk is lower, its capacity to use debt is higher and 
vice versa. 
8. To maintain flexibility the firm mu st maintain some borrowing power 
to take care of unforeseen circumstances. 
9. Capital Structure of other companies is a useful guideline in the capital 
structure planning.  
10. Stock Market Conditions often affect the choice between debt and 
equity. 
11. Every company  operates within a regulatory framework provided by 
the law. 
12. Control as a factor also influences the choice between debt and equity 
especially in companies in which the current holding of management is 
on a lower side. 
13. If the ROI of the company is higher, it can choose to use trading on 
equity to increase its EPS.  
14. When a company increases debt, the financial risk faced by the equity 
shareholders increases consequently their desired rate of return may 
increase. 
OR 
Factors affecting financing decision: (Any four)  
1. A prudent financial manager would normally opt for a source which is 
the cheapest. 
2. The risk associated with each of the sources is different. 
3. Higher the floatation cost, less attractive the source. 
4. A stronger cash flow position may make debt financing more viable 
than funding through equity. 
5. If a business has high fixed operating costs, it must reduce fixed 
financing costs. 
6. Issues of more equity may lead to dilution of management’s control 
over the business.  
7. Health of the capital market may also affect the choice of source of 
funds. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
Earnings per share = ₹ 35  
 
EPS = Earning after tax / No.of  equity shares 
 
35= Earning after tax  / 70,000 
 
 3  
 
 
Earning after tax = ₹  24,50,000   
 
Interest= 50,00,000 x7/100 = ₹. 3,50,0000 
Let the Earning before tax (EBT) = x  
EBT- Tax= EAT 
 
X-0.30 x= 24,50,000 
0.70 x = 24,50,000 
x= 24,50,000/0.70 
x= 35,00,000 
Earning before tax = ₹. 35,00,000 
 
EBIT = Earning before tax + Interest     
         =  35,00,000 + 3,50,000 
         =   ₹. 38,50,000 
ROI= EBIt/total Investment  ×  100= 38,50,000 / 1,20,00,000 × 100 = 32.08% 
As ROI (32.08%) > Rate of interest (7%).  The company can choose to use 
trading o n equity  to increase its EPS . The finance manager was justified in 
making this recommendation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1  
30 
A consumer should keep in mind the following responsibilities while 
purchasing, using and consuming goods and services (Any four)— 
(i)  Be aware about various goods and services available in the market so that 
an intelligent and wise choice can be made. 
 
(ii) Buy only standardized goods as they provide quality assurance. Thus, look 
for ISI mark on electrical goods, FPO mark on food product s, Hallmark on 
jewelry, etc. 
 
(iii) Learn about the risks associated with products and services, follow 
manufacturer’s instructions and use the products safely. 
 
(iv) Read labels carefully so as to have information about prices, net weight, 
manufacturing and expiry dates, etc. 
 
(v) Assert yourself to ensure that you get a fair deal. 
 
(vi) Be honest in your dealings. Choose only from legal goods and services and 
discourage unscrupulous practices like black-marketing, hoarding, etc. 
 
(viii) File a complaint in an appropriate consumer forum in case of a 
shortcoming in the quality of goods purchased or services availed. Do not fail 
to take an action even when the amount involved is small. 
 
(ix) Form consumer societies which would play an active part in educating 
consumers and safeguarding their interests. 
 
(x) Respect the environment. Avoid waste, littering and contributing to 
pollution. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1x4=4) 
31 
Techniques of Scientific Management given by F.W.Taylor: 
 
Method Study 
The objective of method study is to find out one best way of doing the job. 
There are various methods of doing the job. To determine the best way there 
are several parameters. Right from procurement of raw materials till the final 
product is delivered to t he customer every activity is part of method study. 
Taylor devised the concept of assembly line by using method study. Ford 
Motor 
Company used this concept very successfully. Even now auto companies are 
using it. 
The objective of the whole exercise is to m inimize the cost of production and 
maximize the quality and satisfaction of the customer. For this purpose many 
techniques like process charts and operations research etc. are used. 
For designing a car, the assembly line production would entail deciding th e 
sequence of operations, place for men, machines and raw materials etc. All 
this is part of method study. 
 
 
(b) Functional foremanship is an extension of the principle of division of work 
and specialization to the shop floor. Each worker will have to take  orders from 
these eight foremen in the related process or function of production. Foremen 
should have intelligence, education, tact, grit, judgment, special knowledge, 
manual dexterity, and energy, honesty and good health. Since all these 
qualities could not be found in a single person, Taylor proposed eight 
specialists. Each specialist is to be assigned work according to her/his qualities. 
For example, those with technical mastery, intelligence and grit may be given 
planning work. Those with energy and go od health may be assigned execution 
work 
 
( c ) Standardization refers to the process of setting standards for every 
business activity; it can be standardization of process, raw material, time, 
product, machinery, methods or working conditions. These standards are the 
benchmarks, which must be adhered to during production. The Objective Of 
(i) To reduce a given line or product to fixed types, sizes and characteristics. 
(ii) To establish interchangeability of manufactured parts and products. 
(iii) To establish standards of excellence and quality in materials. 
(iv) To establish standards of performance of men and machines 
 
(d) Taylor was a strong advocate of a piece wage system. He wanted to 
differentiate between efficient and inefficient workers. The standard time and 
other parameters should be deter mined on the basis of the work - study 
discussed above. The workers can then be classified as efficient or inefficient 
on the basis of these standards. He wanted to reward efficient workers. So he 
introduced different rates of wage payment for those who per formed above 
standard and for those who performed below standard. 
 
(3X2=6) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3X2=6) 
OR 
 
 
Principles of Management given by Henry Fayol: 
 
(a)Unity of Command: According to Fayol there should be one and only one 
boss for every individual employee. If an employee gets orders from two 
superiors at the same time the principle of unity of command is violated. The 
principle of unity of command sta tes that each participant in a formal 
organization should receive orders from and be responsible to only one 
superior. Fayol gave a lot of importance to this principle. He felt that if this 
principle is violated “authority is undermined; discipline is in j eopardy, order 
disturbed and stability threatened”. The principle resembles military 
organization. Dual subordination should be avoided. This is to prevent 
confusion regarding tasks to be done. Suppose a sales person is asked to clinch 
a deal with a buyer and is allowed to give a 10% discount by the marketing 
manager. But the finance department tells her/ him not to offer more than a 
5% discount. Now there is no unity of command. This can be avoided if there is 
coordination between various departments. 
 
b) Equity: Good sense and experience are needed to ensure fairness to all 
employees, who should be treated as fairly as possible,” according to Fayol. 
This principle emphasizes kindliness and justice in the behavior of managers 
towards workers. This will ensure loyalty and devotion. Fayol does not rule out 
use of force sometimes. Rather he says that lazy personnel should be dealt 
with sternly to send the message that everyone is equal in the eyes of the 
management. There should be no discrimination against any one on account of 
sex, religion, language, caste, belief or nationality etc. In practice we can 
observe that now a days in multinational corporations people of various 
nationalities work together in a discrimination free environment. Equal 
opportunities are available for everyone in such companies to rise. 
( c )Remuneration of Employees: The overall pay and compensation should be 
fair to both employees and the organization. The employees should be paid 
fair wages, which should give them at least a reasonabl e standard of living. At 
the same time it should be within the paying capacity of the company. In other 
words, remuneration should be just and equitable. This will ensure a congenial 
atmosphere and good relations between workers and management. 
Consequently, the working of the company would be smooth. 
 
(d) Initiative:  Workers should be encouraged to develop and carry out their 
plans for improvements according to Fayol. Initiative means taking the first 
step with self-motivation. It is thinking out and executing the plan. It is one of 
the traits of an intelligent person. Initiative should be encouraged. But it does 
not mean going against the established practices of the company for the sake 
of being different. A good company should have an employee suggestion 
system whereby initiative/suggestions which result in substantial cost/time 
reduction should be 
 
32 Steps in the process of planning to be followed by a manager before 
performing the step of evaluation of alternatives: 
Setting Objectives: The first and foremost step is setting objectives. Every 
organization must have certain objectives. Objectives may be set for the entire 
organization and each department or unit within the organization. Objectives 
or goals specify what the organization wants to achieve. It could mean an 
increase in sales by 20% which could be the objective of the entire 
organization. How  all departments would contribute to the organizational 
goals is the plan that is to be drawn up. Objectives should be stated clearly for 
all departments, units and employees. They give direction to all departments. 
Departments/ units then need to set thei r own objectives within the broad 
framework of the organization’s philosophy. Objectives have to percolate 
down to each unit and employees at all levels. At the same time, managers 
must contribute ideas and participate in the objective setting process. The y 
must also understand how their actions contribute to achieving objectives. If 
the end result is clear it becomes easier to work towards the goal. 
(ii) Developing Premises: Planning is concerned with the future which is 
uncertain and every planner is usin g conjecture about what might happen in 
future. Therefore, the manager is required to make certain assumptions about 
the future. These assumptions are called premises. Assumptions are the base 
material upon which plans are to be drawn. The base material ma y be in the 
form of forecasts, existing plans or any past information about policies. The 
premises or assumptions must be the same for all and there should be total 
agreement on them. All managers involved in planning should be familiar with 
and use the sa me assumptions. For example, forecasting is important in 
developing premises as it is a technique of gathering information. Forecasts 
can be made about the demand for a particular product, policy change, 
interest rates, prices of capital goods, tax rates e tc. Accurate forecasts 
therefore become essential for successful plans. 
  (iii) Identifying alternative courses of action: Once objectives are set, 
assumptions are made. Then the next step would be to act upon them. There 
may be many ways to act and achiev e objectives. All the alternative courses of 
action should be identified. The course of action which may be taken could be 
either routine or innovative. An innovative course may be adopted by involving 
more people and sharing their ideas. If the project is  important, then more 
alternatives should be generated and thoroughly discussed amongst the 
members of the organization.               
OR 
The next three steps are : 
i) Identifying alternative courses of action: Once objectives are set, 
assumptions are made. Then the next step would be to act upon them. There 
 (2X3=6) 
½ mark for 
heading and 1½ 
mark for the 
explanation 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
(2X3=6) 
½ mark for 
heading and 1½ 
mark for the 
explanation 
 
 
 
may be many ways to act and achieve objectives. All the alternative courses of 
action should be identified. The course of action which may be taken could be 
either routine or innovative. An innovative course may be adopted by involving 
more people and sharing their ideas. If the project is important, then more 
alternatives should be generated and thoroughly discussed amongst the 
members of the organization. 
ii) Evaluating alternative courses: The next st ep is to weigh the pros and cons 
of each alternative. Each course will have many variables which have to be 
weighed against each other. The positive and negative aspects of each 
proposal need to be evaluated in the light of the objective to be achieved. In  
financial plans, for example, the risk‐return trade‐off is very common. The 
more risky the investment, the higher the returns it is likely to give. To 
evaluate such proposals detailed calculations of earnings, earnings per share, 
interest, taxes, dividend s are made and decisions taken. Accurate forecasts in 
conditions of certainty/uncertainty then become vital assumptions for these 
proposals. Alternatives are evaluated in the light of their feasibility and 
consequences. 
(iii) Selecting an alternative: This  is the real point of decision making. The best 
plan has to be adopted and implemented. The ideal plan, of course, would be 
the most feasible, profitable and with least negative consequences. Most plans 
may not always be subjected to a mathematical analysi s. In such cases, 
subjectivity and the manager’s experience, judgment and at  times, intuition 
play an important part in selecting the most viable alternative. Sometimes, a 
combination of plans may be selected instead of one best course. The manager 
will have to apply permutations and combinations and select the best possible 
course of action. 
 
 
 
 
33 
Importance of Decentralization: 
 
1. “Response does not take time”. Quick decision making - In a 
decentralized organization since decisions are taken at levels which are 
nearest to the point of action and there is no requirement for 
approvals from many levels, the process is much faster. 
2. “Who can get a chance to prove their abilities”. Develops managerial 
talent for the future - Decentralization gives m anagers a chance to 
prove their abilities and creates a reservoir of qualified manpower that 
can be considered to fill up more challenging positions through 
promotion. 
3. “Identifying those executives who have the necessary potential to 
become dynamic leaders ”. Develops initiative among subordinates - 
Decentralization helps to promote self -reliance and confidence 
amongst the subordinates. It also keeps them in a state wherein they 
are constantly challenged and have to develop solutions for the 
various problems they encounter. 
4. “This makes it possible to evaluate performance at each level and each 
department can be individually held accountable for their results. ”  
(11/2X4=6) 
 
(½ mark for 
quoting+½ 
mark for 
identification+½ 
mark for 
explaining) 
 
 
Better control - Feedback from levels helps to analyze variances and 
improve operations. 
34 Functions of marketing, apart from the ones Choco Ltd is already performing: 
(Any four) 
1. Gathering and analyzing market information: This is necessary to 
identify the needs of the customers and make various decisions for the 
successful marketing of the products and services. This is important for 
making an analysis of the available opportunities and threats as well as 
strengths and weaknesses of the organization and help in deciding 
what opportunities can best be pursued by it. 
2. Product designing and development: The design of the product 
contributes to making the product attractive to the targe t customers. 
A good design can improve performance of a product and give it a 
competitive advantage in the market. 
3. Standardization: Standardization refers to producing goods of 
predetermined specifications which help in achieving uniformity and 
consistency in the output  
4. Packaging and labeling - Packaging refers to designing and developing 
the package for the products. Labeling refers to designing and 
developing the label to be put on the product. 
5. Transportation- Transportation involves physical movement of goods 
from one place to another. As generally the users of products 
particularly consumer products are wide spread and geographically 
separated from the place where they are produced. 
6. Storage and warehousing - In order to maintain smooth flow of 
products in  the market, there is a need for proper storage of the 
products. Further there is need for storage of adequate stock of goods 
to protect against unavoidable delays in delivery or to meet out 
contingencies in the demand. Ram Kumar the CEO of Sabarmati 
Enterprises in a meeting with the middle management of the company 
advised that the personal goals of the people should be reconciled 
with the organizational objectives for harmony in the organization. 
Briefly explain the objective of management that he was referring to. 
(1½ X 4 =6) 
(½ mark for 
heading and 1 
mark for the 
explanation) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- END BusinessStudies-MS-2022-23.pdf ---
